

WHEN SPECIES MEET




cary wolfe, series editorWhen Species MeetDonna J. HarawayThe Poetics of DNAJudith RoofThe ParasiteMichel Serres




WHEN SPECIES MEETDonna J. HarawayPosthumanities, Volume 3University of Minnesota PressMinneapolisLondon




Copyright 2008Donna J. HarawayAll rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by anymeans, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, orotherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.Published by the University of Minnesota Press111Third Avenue South, Suite 290Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520http://www.upress.umn.eduLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataHaraway, Donna Jeanne.When species meet / Donna J. Haraway.p. cm. —(Posthumanities)Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN: 978-0-8166-5045-3 (hc : alk. paper)ISBN-10: 0-8166-5045-4 (hc : alk. paper)ISBN: 978-0-8166-5046-0 (pb : alk. paper)ISBN-10: 0-8166-5046-2 (pb : alk. paper)1. Human-animal relationships. I. Title.QL85.H37 2008179´.3—dc222007029022Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paperThe University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator andemployer.151413121110090810987654321




CONTENTSAcknowledgments  viiPART I. WE HAVE NEVER BEEN HUMAN1. When Species Meet: Introductions   32. Value-Added Dogs and Lively Capital   453. Sharing Suffering: Instrumental Relationsbetween Laboratory Animals and Their People   694. Examined Lives: Practices of Love and Knowledgein Purebred Dogland   955. Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers: Bioethical Angst andQuestions of Flourishing   133PART II. NOTES OF A SPORTSWRITER’S DAUGHTER6. Able Bodies and Companion Species   1617. Species of Friendship   1818. Training in the Contact Zone: Power, Play, and Invention in theSport of Agility   205PART III. TANGLED SPECIES9. Crittercam: Compounding Eyes in Naturecultures   24910. Chicken   26511. Becoming Companion Species in Technoculture   27512. Parting Bites: Nourishing Indigestion   285Notes   303Publication History   393Index   395




This page intentionally left blank 




ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWhen Species Meetis an acknowledgment of the lively knottingsthat tie together the world I inhabit, but here I want to name someof the human and nonhuman animals who are especially entwinedin the tissues of this book. All those I call my animal people and theircompanions must come ﬁrst—the scholars, artists, friends, sports bud-dies, and scientists whose work is directly shaped by the critters theylove and know. These people and critters helped me materially to writethis book by becoming ethnographic subjects and, in the case of thehumans, also by reading chapter drafts and listening critically to my rants.Agility friends: those special buddies with whom Cayenne and Istudy and play agility include Pam Richards and Cappuccino, SuzanneCogen and Amigo, Barbara McElhiney and Bud, June Bogdan andChloe, Liza Buckner with Annabelle and Taiko, Annette Thomasonand Sydney, Sharon Kennedy and Dena, Susan Cochran and Aiko,Gail and Ralph Frazier with Squeeze and Tally Ho, Derede Arthurand Soja, Susie Buford and Zipper, Connie Tuft with Tag andKeeper, Faith Bugely with Rio and Gracie, Garril Page and Cali,Clare Price and Jazz, David Connet and Megan, Joan Jamison




and Boomer, Marion and Mike Bashista with Merlin and Kelli, LaurieRaz-Astrakhan and Blue, Chris Hempel and Keeper, Laura Hartwickwith Ruby and Otterpup, Diana Wilson and Callie, Dee Hutton andIzzy, Luanne Vidak and Jiﬀy, Crissy Hastings Baugh and Gracie, KarenPlemens Lucas and Nikki, Gayle Dalmau and a skein of silky terriers(Kismet, Sprite, and Toot), and Linda Lang with Rosie and Tyler. Myagility instructors are Gail Frazier, Rob Michalski (with Hobbes and Fate),and Lauri Plummer. Ziji Scott, with Ashe, knows how much she hasgiven Cayenne and me with her spirit and her magic chiropractor’s hands.Animals in science: the dogs helping with this book who came intothe world through the practices of science include Spike and Bruno (andtheir human Gwen Tatsuno), agility athletes who are Newfoundland–border collie crosses from breeding for the dog genome project. My dogCayenne contributed DNA for both the merle gene identiﬁcation projectand a drug sensitivity test. But most of the dogs who work in sciencedo so anonymously, live in kennels rather than homes, and all too oftenare in pain. They and all the other critters whose lives and deaths are builtinto knowledge making deserve acknowledgment, but that is only thebeginning of what we owe them. Working animals, including food- andﬁber-producing critters, haunt me throughout this book. Response hashardly begun.Graduate students and visiting postdocs in my seminars linkingscience studies, animal studies, and feminist theory at the University ofCalifornia at Santa Cruz deserve a special thanks. They include RebeccaHerzig, Thomas van Dooren, Cressida Limon, Maria Puig de la Bella-casa, Natasha Myers, Heather Swanson, Jake Metcalf, Shannon Brown-lee, Raissa Burns, Scout Calvert, Lindsey Collins, Lindsay Kelley, SandraKoelle, Natalie Loveless, Matt Moore, Astrid Schrader, Mari Spira,Kalindi Vora, Eric Stanley, Matthew Moore, Marcos Becquer, EbenKirksey, Martha Kenney, Chloe Medina, Cora Stratton, Natalie Hansen,Danny Solomon, Anna Higgins, Eunice Blavascunas, Nicole Archer,Mary Weaver, Jennifer Watanabe, Kris Weller, Sha LaBare, Adam Reed,and Carrie Friese (UCSF). I owe a huge debt of thanks in this book alsoto former students, now colleagues, especially Eva Hayward, Chris Rose,Gillian Goslinga, Kami Chisholm, Alexis Shotwell, Joe Dumit, SarahJain, Karen Hoﬀman, Barbara Ley, Anjie Rosga, Adam Geary, DavidviiidACKNOWLEDGMENTS




Delgado Shorter, Thyrza Goodeve, Rebecca Hall, Cori Hayden, KimTallBear, Kaushik Sunder Rajan, Dawn Coppin, and Delcianna Winders.Colleagues at UCSC have been crucial to my thinking aboutanimal–human encounters, especially Gopal Balakrishnan, Karen Barad,Nancy Chen, Jim Cliﬀord, Angela Davis, Dorothea Ditchﬁeld, BarbaraEpstein, Carla Freccero, Wlad Godzich, Jody Greene, Susan Harding(with Bijou and Lulu Moppet, not to mention Marco!), Lisbeth Haas,Emily Honig, David and Jocelyn Hoy, Gary Lease, David Marriott, TyrusMiller, Jim McCloskey, Karen McNally, Helene Moglen, Sheila Namir,Vicki and John Pearse, Ravi Rajan, Jennifer Reardon, Neferti Tadiar,Dick Terdiman, and Anna Tsing.Scholars, biologists, and artists from many places helped me indiverse ways with When Species Meet,including Carol Adams, MarcBekoﬀ, Nick Bingham, Lynda Birke, GeoﬀBowker, Rosi Braidotti,Jonathan Burt, Rebecca Cassidy, Adele Clarke, Sheila Conant, IstvanCsicsery-Ronay, Beatriz da Costa, Troy Duster, Mike Fischer, AdrianFranklin, Sarah Franklin, Erica Fudge, Joan Fujimura, Scott Gilbert,Faye Ginsburg, Michael Hadﬁeld, Nancy Hartsock, Deborah Heath,Stefan Helmreich, Laura Hobgood-Oster, Don Ihde, Lupicinio Íñiguez,Alison Jolly, Margaretta Jolly, Caroline Jones, Eduardo Kohn, DonnaLandry, Tom Laqueur, Bruno Latour, Ann Leﬄer, Diana Long, LynnMargulis, Garry Marvin, Donald McCaig, Susan McHugh, EduardoMendietta, Alyce Miller, Gregg Mitman, Donald Moore, Darcy Morey,Molly Mullin, Aihwa Ong, Benjamin Orlove, Patricia Piccinini, AnniePotts, Beatriz Preciado, Paul Rabinow, Lynn Randolph, Karen Rader,Rayna Rapp, Jonah Raskin, Manuela Rossini, Joe Rouse, Thelma Rowell,Marshall Sahlins, Juliana Schiesari, Wolfgang Schirmacher, JosephSchnei der, Gabrielle Schwab, Evan Selinger, Barbara Smuts, SusanSquier, Leigh Star, Peter Steeves, Isabelle Stengers, Marilyn Strathern,Lucy Suchman, Anna-Liisa Syrjnen, Karen-Sue Taussig, Jesse Tesser,Charis Thompson, Nick Trujillo, Albian Urdank, Ian Wedde, SteveWoolgar, and Brian Wynne.I have given invited papers, seminars, and lectures at too many placesto name while I was thinking about this book. All of the people whoread, listened, and responded made a diﬀerence. I also know how much Iowe to the institutions that made research and writing possible, especiallyACKNOWLEDGMENTSdix




my department, History of Consciousness and the Center for CulturalStudies, at the University of California at Santa Cruz.At a critical time, Cary Wolfe asked me if my book were committed,and then he helped me think through my chapters. His writing hadalready shaped me, and I am deeply grateful. The readers for the Uni-versity of Minnesota Press, Isabelle Stengers and Erica Fudge, madethemselves known to me after their reviews; their comments helped meimmensely.My brothers, Rick Miller-Haraway and Bill Haraway, helped mefeel and think through how to write about our father, Frank Haraway,after his death. Dad’s willingness to listen to my sports reports fromagility underpins this book.Sheila Peuse, Cheryl VanDeVeer, Laura McShane, and KathyDurcan hold a special place in my soul for all their help with letters of rec-ommendation, manuscripts, classes, students, and life.For thinking with me about dogs and much else over many years, Iowe sincere thanks to Rusten Hogness, Suze Rutherford, Susan Caudill,C. A. Sharp, Linda Weisser, Catherine de la Cruz, Katie King, ValHartouni (and Grace), and Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi. With Susan, Imourn the loss of Willem, the Great Pyrenees, from our lives and land.Rusten not only helped me think and write better; he also used his com-puter savvy to nurture every stage of the process technically, and he agreedwith considerable grace to our inviting a puppy dynamo into our lives inwhen we both knew better.David Schneider and his standard poodle, George, taught me aboutAnglo-American kinship in life and death. David and I ﬁrst confronteddog training together through reading Vicki Hearne and studying theawful art of obedience in classes with our long-suﬀering canine compan-ions, George, Sojourner, and Alexander Berkman.How can I acknowledge Cayenne and Roland, the dogs of my heart?This book is for them, even if they might prefer a scratch-and-sniﬀver-sion, one without endnotes.xdACKNOWLEDGMENTS




I. WE HAVE NEVERBEEN HUMAN




This page intentionally left blank 




1. WHEN SPECIES MEETIntroductionsTwo questions guide this book: () Whom and what do I touchwhen I touch my dog? and () How is “becoming with” a practiceof becoming worldly? I tie these questions together in expressions Ilearned in Barcelona from a Spanish lover of French bulldogs, alter-globalisationand autre-mondialisation.1These terms were invented byEuropean activists to stress that their approaches to militarized neolib-eral models of world building are not about antiglobalization but aboutnurturing a more just and peaceful other-globalization. There is a prom-ising autre-mondialisation to be learned in retying some of the knots ofordinary multispecies living on earth.I think we learn to be worldly from grappling with, rather than gen-eralizing from, the ordinary. I am a creature of the mud, not the sky. I ama biologist who has always found ediﬁcation in the amazing abilitiesof slime to hold things in touch and to lubricate passages for livingbeings and their parts. I love the fact that human genomes can befound in only about percent of all the cells that occupy the mun-dane space I call my body; the other percent of the cells areﬁlled with the genomes of bacteria, fungi, protists, and such,




some of which play in a symphony necessary to my being alive at all, andsome of which are hitching a ride and doing the rest of me, of us, no harm.I am vastly outnumbered by my tiny companions; better put, I becomean adult human being in company with these tiny messmates. To be oneis always to become withmany. Some of these personal microscopic biotaare dangerous to the me who is writing this sentence; they are held incheck for now by the measures of the coordinated symphony of all theothers, human cells and not, that make the conscious me possible. I lovethat when “I” die, all these benign and dangerous symbionts will takeover and use whatever is left of “my” body, if only for a while, since “we”are necessary to one another in real time. As a little girl, I loved to inhabitminiature worlds brimming with even more tiny real and imagined enti-ties. I loved the play of scales in time and space that children’s toys andstories made patent for me. I did not know then that this love preparedme for meeting my companion species, who are my maker.Figures help me grapple inside the ﬂesh of mortal world-makingen tanglements that I call contact zones.2The Oxford English Dictio-naryrecords the meaning of “chimerical vision” for “ﬁguration” in aneighteenth-century source, and that meaning is still implicit in my senseof ﬁgure.3Figures collect the people through their invitation to inhabit thecorporeal story told in their lineaments. Figures are not representationsor didactic illustrations, but rather material–semiotic nodes or knotsin which diverse bodies and meanings coshape one another. For me, ﬁg-ures have always been where the biological and literary or artistic cometogether with all of the force of lived reality. My body itself is just sucha ﬁgure, literally.For many years I have written from the belly of powerful ﬁguressuch as cyborgs, monkeys and apes, oncomice, and, more recently, dogs.In every case, the ﬁgures are at the same time creatures of imagined pos-sibility and creatures of ﬁerce and ordinary reality; the dimensions tangleand require response. When Species Meetis about that kind of double-ness, but it is even more about the cat’s cradle games in which those whoare to be in the world are constituted in intra- and interaction. The part-ners do not precede the meeting; species of all kinds, living and not,are consequent on a subject- and object-shaping dance of encounters.Neither the partners nor the meetings in this book are merely literary4dWHEN SPECIES MEET




This page intentionally left blank 




Jim’s Dog.Courtesy of James Clifford.




conceits; rather, they are ordinary beings-in-encounter in the house, lab,ﬁeld, zoo, park, oﬃce, prison, ocean, stadium, barn, or factory. As ordi-nary knotted beings, they are also always meaning-making ﬁgures thatgather up those who respond to them into unpredictable kinds of “we.”Among the myriad of entangled, coshaping species of the earth, contem-porary human beings’ meetings with other critters and, especially, but notonly, with those called “domestic” are the focus of this book.And so in the chapters to follow, readers will meet cloned dogs,databased tigers, a baseball writer on crutches, a health and geneticsactivist in Fresno, wolves and dogs in Syria and the French Alps, ChickenLittle and Bush legs in Moldavia, tsetse ﬂies and guinea pigs in a Zim-babwean lab in a young adult novel, feral cats, whales wearing cameras,felons and pooches in training in prison, and a talented dog and middle-aged woman playing a sport together in California. All of these are ﬁg-ures, and all are mundanely here, on this earth, now, asking who “we” willbecome when species meet.JIM’S DOG AND LEONARDO’S DOGMeet Jim’s dog. My colleague and friend Jim Cliﬀord took this photo-graph during a December walk in one of the damp canyons of the SantaCruz greenbelt near his home. This attentive, sitting dog endured foronly one season. The next winter the shapes and light in the canyon didnot vouchsafe a canine soul to animate the burned-out redwood stumpcovered with redwood needles, mosses, ferns, lichens—and even a littleCalifornia bay laurel seedling for a docked tail—that a friend’s eye hadfound for me the year before. So many species, so many kinds, meet inJim’s dog, who suggests an answer to my question, Whom and what dowe touch when we touch this dog? How does this touch make us moreworldly, in alliance with all the beings who work and play for an alter-globalization that can endure more than one season?We touch Jim’s dog with ﬁngery eyes made possible by a ﬁne digi-tal camera, computers, servers, and e-mail programs through which thehigh-density jpg was sent to me.4Infolded into the metal, plastic, andelectronic ﬂesh of the digital apparatus is the primate visual system thatJim and I have inherited, with its vivid color sense and sharp focal power.WHEN SPECIES MEETd5




Our kind of capacity for perception and sensual pleasure ties us to thelives of our primate kin. Touching this heritage, our worldliness mustanswer to and for those other primate beings, both in their ordinaryhabitats and in labs, television and ﬁlm studios, and zoos. Also, the bio-logical colonizing opportunism of organisms, from the glowing but in-visible viruses and bacteria to the crown of ferns on top of this pooch’shead, is palpable in the touch. Biological species diversity and all that asksin our time come with this found dog.In this camera-begot canid’s haptic–optic touch, we are inside thehistories of IT engineering, electronic product assembly-line labor, min-ing and IT waste disposal, plastics research and manufacturing, transna-tional markets, communications systems, and technocultural consumerhabits. The people and the things are in mutually constituting, intra-active touch.5Visually and tactically, I am in the presence of the intersec-tional race-, sex-, age-, class-, and region-diﬀerentiated systems of laborthat made Jim’s dog live. Response seems the least that is required in thiskind of worldliness.This dog could not have come to me without the leisure-time prom-enading practices of the early twenty-ﬁrst century in a university town onthe central California coast. Those urban walking pleasures touch thelabor practices of late nineteenth-century loggers who, without chain-saws, cut the tree whose burned stump took on a postarboreal life. Wheredid the lumber from that tree go? The historically deliberate ﬁring by theloggers or the lightning-caused ﬁres in dry-season California carved Jim’sdog from the tree’s blackened remains. Indebted to the histories of bothenvironmentalism and class, the greenbelt policies of California citiesresisting the fate of Silicon Valley ensured that Jim’s dog was not bull-dozed for housing at the western edge of real-estate hungry Santa Cruz.The water-eroded and earthquake-sculpted ruggedness of the canyonshelped too. The same civic policies and earth histories also allow cougarsto stroll down from the campus woodlands through the brushy canyonsdeﬁning this part of town. Walking with my furry dogs oﬀleash in thesecanyons makes me think about these possible feline presences. I reclip theleashes. Visually ﬁngering Jim’s dog involves touching all the importantecological and political histories and struggles of ordinary small cities thathave asked, Who should eat whom, and who should cohabit? The rich6dWHEN SPECIES MEET




naturalcultural contact zones multiply with each tactile look. Jim’s dog isa provocation to curiosity, which I regard as one of the ﬁrst obligationsand deepest pleasures of worldly companion species.6Jim’s seeing the mutt in the ﬁrst place was an act of friendship froma man who had not sought dogs in his life and for whom they had notbeen particularly present before his colleague seemed to think about andrespond to little else. Furry dogs were not the ones who then came tohim, but another sort of canid quite as wonderful dogged his path. Asmy informants in U.S. dog culture would say, Jim’s is a real dog, a one-oﬀ,like a ﬁne mixed-ancestry dog who could never be replicated but must beencountered. Surely, there is no question about the mixed and myriadancestors, as well as contemporaries, in this encrusted charcoal dog. Ithink this is what Alfred North Whitehead might have meant by a con-crescence of prehensions.7It is deﬁnitely at the heart of what I learn whenI ask whom I touch when I touch a dog. I learn something about how toinherit in the ﬂesh. Woof . . .Leonardo’s dog hardly needs an introduction. Painted between and , da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man,the Man of Perfect Proportions, haspaved his way in the imaginations of technoculture and canine pet culturealike. Sydney Harris’s cartoon of Man’s celebrated canine compan-ion mimes a ﬁgure that has come to mean Renaissance humanism; tomean modernity; to mean the generative tie of art, science, technology,genius, progress, and money. I cannot count the number of times daVinci’s Vitruvian Manappeared in the conference brochures for genomicsmeetings or advertisements for molecular biological instruments and labreagents in the s. The only close competitors for illustrations andads were Vesalius’s anatomical drawings of dissected human ﬁgures andMichelangelo’s Creation of Adamfrom the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.8High Art, High Science: genius, progress, beauty, power, money. TheMan of Perfect Proportions brings both the number magic and the real-life organic ubiquity of the Fibonacci sequence to the fore. Transmutedinto the form of his master, the Dog of Perfect Proportions helps methink about why this preeminently humanist ﬁgure cannot work for thekind of autre-mondialisation I seek with earthly companions in the waythat Jim’s dog does. Harris’s cartoon is funny, but laughter is not enough.Leonardo’s dog is the companion species for technohumanism and itsWHEN SPECIES MEETd7




8dWHEN SPECIES MEETdreams of puriﬁcation and transcendence. I want to walk instead with themotley crowd called Jim’s dog, where the clean lines between traditionaland modern, organic and technological, human and nonhuman give wayto the infoldings of the ﬂesh that powerful ﬁgures such as the cyborgsand dogs I know both signify and enact.9Maybe that is why Jim’s dog isnow the screen saver on my computer.

“Leonardo da Vinci’s Dog.” CopyrightSidney Harris, ScienceCartoonsPlus.com.




WHEN SPECIES MEETd9PROFESSIONAL MEETINGSThat brings us to the more usual encounters of dogs and cyborgs, inwhich their supposed enmity is onstage. Dan Piraro’s BizarroSundaycartoon from caught the rules of engagement perfectly. Welcomingthe attendees, the small dog keynote speaker at the American Associationof Lapdogs points to the illuminated slide of an open laptop computer,solemnly intoning, “Ladies and Gentlemen. . . behold the enemy!” Thepun that simultaneously joins and separates lapdogs and laptops is won-derful, and it opens a world of inquiry. A real dog person might ﬁrstask how capacious human laps can actually be for holding even sizablepooches and a computer at the same time. That sort of question tendsto arise in the late afternoon in a home oﬃce if a human being is still atthe computer and neglecting important obligations to go for a walk withthe eﬀectively importuning beast-no-longer-on-the-ﬂoor. However, morephilosophically weighty, if not more practically urgent, questions also lurkin this Bizarrocartoon.Modernist versions of humanism and posthumanism alike havetaproots in a series of what Bruno Latour calls the Great Divides betweenwhat counts as nature and as society, as nonhuman and as human.10Whelped in the Great Divides, the principal Others to Man, includinghis “posts,” are well documented in ontological breed registries in both

Copyright Dan Piraro, King Features Syndicate.




past and present Western cultures: gods, machines, animals, monsters,creepy crawlies, women, servants and slaves, and noncitizens in general.Outside the security checkpoint of bright reason, outside the apparatusesof re production of the sacred image of the same, these “others” have aremarkable capacity to induce panic in the centers of power and self-certainty. Terrors are regularly expressed in hyperphilias and hyperpho-bias, and examples of this are no richer than in the panics roused by theGreat Divide between animals (lapdogs) and machines (laptops) in theearly twenty-ﬁrst century c.e.Technophilias and technophobias vie with organophilias andorgan ophobias, and taking sides is not left to chance. If one loves organicnature, to express a love of technology makes one suspect. If one ﬁndscyborgs to be promising sorts of monsters, then one is an unreliable allyin the ﬁght against the destruction of all things organic.11I was quitepersonally made to understand this point at a professional meeting, awonderful conference called “Taking Nature Seriously” in , at whichI was a keynote speaker. I was subjected to a fantasy of my own publicrape by name in a pamphlet distributed by a small group of self-identiﬁeddeep ecology, anarchist activists, because, it seemed, my commitment tothe mixed organic–technological hybrids ﬁgured in cyborgs made meworse than a researcher at Monsanto, who at least claims no alliance withecofeminism. I am made to recall those researchers even at Monsantowho may well take antiracist environmental feminism seriously and toimagine how alliances might be built with them. I was also in the presenceof the many deep ecologists and anarchists who have no truck with theaction or analysis of my hecklers’ self-righteous and incurious stance. Inaddition to reminding me that I am a woman (see the Great Dividesabove)—something class and color privilege bonded to professional sta-tus can mute for long periods of time—the rape scenario reminded meforcibly why I seek my siblings in the nonarboreal, laterally communicat-ing, fungal shapes of the queer kin group that ﬁnds lapdogs and laptopsin the same commodious laps.At one of the conference panels, I heard a sad man in the audiencesay that rape seems a legitimate instrument against those who rape theearth; he seemed to regard this as an ecofeminist position, to the horrorof the men and women of that political persuasion in the room. Everyone10dWHEN SPECIES MEET




I heard at the session thought the guy was slightly dangerous and deﬁ-nitely politically embarrassing, but mainly crazy in the colloquial senseif not the clinical. Nonetheless, the quasi-psychotic panic quality of theman’s threatening remarks is worth some attention because of the way theextreme shows the underside of the normal. In particular, this would-berapist-in-defense-of-mother-earth seems shaped by the culturally normalfantasy of human exceptionalism. This is the premise that humanityalone is not a spatial and temporal web of interspecies dependencies.Thus, to be human is to be on the opposite side of the Great Divide fromall the others and so to be afraid of—and in bloody love with—whatgoes bump in the night. The threatening man at the conference was wellmarinated in the institutionalized, long dominant Western fantasy thatall that is fully human is fallen from Eden, separated from the mother,in the domain of the artiﬁcial, deracinated, alienated, and therefore free.For this man, the way out of his culture’s deep commitments to humanexceptionalism requires a one-way rapture to the other side of the divide.To return to the mother is to return to nature and stand against Man-the-Destroyer, by advocating the rape of women scientists at Monsanto,if available, or of a traitorous keynote environmentalist feminist, if one ison the spot.Freud is our great theorist of panics of the Western psyche, andbecause of Derrida’s commitment to track down “the whole anthro-pomorphic reinstitution of the superiority of the human order over theanimal order, of the law over the living,” he is my guide to Freud’s ap -proach on this question.12Freud described three great historical woundsto the primary narcissism of the self-centered human subject, who tries tohold panic at bay by the fantasy of human exceptionalism. First is theCopernican wound that removed Earth itself, man’s home world, fromthe center of the cosmos and indeed paved the way for that cosmos toburst open into a universe of inhumane, nonteleological times and spaces.Science made that decentering cut. The second wound is the Darwinian,which put Homo sapiensﬁrmly in the world of other critters, all tryingto make an earthly living and so evolving in relation to one another with-out the sureties of directional signposts that culminate in Man.13Scienceinﬂicted that cruel cut too. The third wound is the Freudian, whichposited an unconscious that undid the primacy of conscious processes,WHEN SPECIES MEETd11




including the reason that comforted Man with his unique excellence, withdire consequences for teleology once again. Science seems to hold thatblade too. I want to add a fourth wound, the informatic or cyborgian,which infolds organic and technological ﬂesh and so melds that GreatDivide as well.Is it any wonder that in every other election cycle the Kansas Boardof Education wants this stuﬀout of the science text books, even if almostall of modern science has to go to accomplish this suturing of rendingwounds to the coherence of a fantastic, but well-endowed, being? Noto-riously, in the last decade voters in Kansas elected opponents of teachingDarwinian evolution to the state board in one election and then replacedthem in the next cycle with what the press calls moderates.14Kansas isnot exceptional; it ﬁgured more than half the public in the United Statesin .15Freud knew Darwinism is not moderate, and a good thingtoo. Doing without both teleology and human exceptionalism is, in myopinion, essential to getting laptops and lapdogs into one lap. More tothe point, these wounds to self-certainty are necessary, if not yet suﬃ-cient, to no longer easily uttering the sentence in any domain, “Ladies andgentlemen, behold the enemy!” Instead, I want my people, those collectedby ﬁgures of mortal relatedness, to go back to that old political buttonfrom the late s, “Cyborgs for earthly survival,” joined to my newerbumper sticker from Barkmagazine, “Dog is my co-pilot.” Both crittersride the earth on the back of the Darwin ﬁsh.16That cyborg and dog come together in the next professional meet-ing in these introductions. A few years ago, Faye Ginsburg, an eminentanthropologist and ﬁlmmaker and the daughter of Benson Ginsburg, apioneering student of canine behavior, sent me a cartoon by WarrenMiller from the March , , New Yorker.Faye’s childhood had beenspent with the wolves her father studied in his lab at the Universityof Chicago and the animals at the Jackson Memorial Laboratories in BarHarbor, Maine, where J. P. Scott and J. L. Fuller also carried out theirfamous inquiries into dog genetics and social behavior from the lates.17In the cartoon a member of a wild wolf pack introduces a con-speciﬁc visitor wearing an electronic communications pack, complete withan antenna for sending and receiving data, with the words, “We foundher wandering at the edge of the forest. She was raised by scientists.” A12dWHEN SPECIES MEET




student of Indigenous media in a digital age, Faye Ginsburg was easilydrawn to the join of ethnography and communications technology inMiller’s cartoon. Since childhood a veteran of integrating into wolf sociallife through the rituals of polite introductions, she was triply hailed. Sheis in my kin group in feminist theory as well, and so it is no surprise thatI ﬁnd myself also in that female telecommunications-packing wolf. Thisﬁgure collects its people through friendship networks, animal–humanhistories, science and technology studies, politics, anthropology and ani-mal behavior studies, and the New Yorker’s sense of humor.This wolf found at the edge of the forest and raised by scientistsﬁgures who I ﬁnd myself to be in the world—that is, an organismshapedby a post–World War II biology that is saturated with information sci-ences and technologies, a biologistschooled in those discourses, and apractitionerof the humanities and ethnographic social sciences. All threeWHEN SPECIES MEETd13

Warren Miller, from CartoonBank.com. Copyright The New Yorkercollection, 1993. Allrights reserved.




14dWHEN SPECIES MEET

Faye Ginsburg and the wolfRemus greeting and playing inBenson Ginsburg’s laboratory atthe University of Chicago.Published in Lookmagazine, “AWolf Can Be a Girl’s Best Friend,”by Jack Star, 1963. Photograph byArchie Lieberman. LookMagazineCollection, Library of Congress,Prints and Photographs Division,LC-L9-60-8812, frame 8.of those subject formations are crucial to this book’s questions aboutworldliness and touch across diﬀerence. The found wolf is meeting otherwolves, but she cannot take her welcome for granted. She must be intro-duced, and her odd communications pack must be explained. She bringsscience and technology into the open in this forest. The wolf pack ispolitely approached, not invaded, and these wolves will decide her fate.This pack is not one of ﬂorid wild-wolf nature fantasies, but a savvy,




WHEN SPECIES MEETd15cosmopolitan, curious lot of free-ranging canids. The wolf mentor andsponsor of the visitor is generous, willing to forgive some degree of igno-rance, but it is up to the visitor to learn about her new acquaintances. Ifall goes well, they will become messmates, companion species, and sig-niﬁcant others to one another, as well as conspeciﬁcs. The scientist–wolfwill send back data as well as bring data to the wolves in the forest. Theseencounters will shape naturecultures for them all.A great deal is at stake in such meetings, and outcomes are notguaranteed. There is no teleological warrant here, no assured happyor unhappy ending, socially, ecologically, or scientiﬁcally. There is onlythe chance for getting on together with some grace. The Great Dividesof animal/human, nature/culture, organic/technical, and wild/domes-tic ﬂat ten into mundane diﬀerences—the kinds that have consequencesand de mand respect and response—rather than rising to sublime andﬁnal ends.COMPANION SPECIESMs Cayenne Pepper continues to colonize all my cells—a sure case ofwhat the biologist Lynn Margulis calls symbiogenesis. I bet if you wereto check our DNA, you’d ﬁnd some potent transfections between us. Hersaliva must have the viral vectors. Surely, her darter-tongue kisses havebeen irresistible. Even though we share placement in the phylum of ver-tebrates, we inhabit not just diﬀerent genera and divergent families butaltogether diﬀerent orders.How would we sort things out? Canid, hominid; pet, professor;bitch, woman; animal, human; athlete, handler. One of us has a microchipinjected under her neck skin for identiﬁcation; the other has a photo IDCalifornia driver’s license. One of us has a written record of her ancestorsfor twenty generations; one of us does not know her great grandparents’names. One of us, product of a vast genetic mixture, is called “purebred.”One of us, equally a product of a vast mixture, is called “white.” Each ofthese names designates a diﬀerent racial discourse, and we both inherittheir consequences in our ﬂesh.One of us is at the cusp of ﬂaming, youthful, physical achievement;the other is lusty but over the hill. And we play a team sport called agility




on the same expropriated Native land where Cayenne’s ancestors herdedsheep. These sheep were imported from the already colonial pastoraleconomy of Australia to feed the California gold rush forty-niners. Inlayers of history, layers of biology, layers of naturecultures, complexity isthe name of our game. We are both the freedom-hungry oﬀspring of con-quest, products of white settler colonies, leaping over hurdles and crawl-ing through tunnels on the playing ﬁeld.I’m sure our genomes are more alike than they should be. Somemolecular record of our touch in the codes of living will surely leave tracesin the world, no matter that we are each reproductively silenced females,one by age and choice, one by surgery without consultation. Her red merleAustralian shepherd’s quick and lithe tongue has swabbed the tissues ofmy tonsils, with all their eager immune system receptors. Who knowswhere my chemical receptors carried her messages or what she took frommy cellular system for distinguishing self from other and binding outsideto inside?We have had forbidden conversation; we have had oral intercourse;we are bound in telling story on story with nothing but the facts. Weare training each other in acts of communication we barely understand.We are, constitutively, companion species. We make each other up, in theﬂesh. Signiﬁcantly other to each other, in speciﬁc diﬀerence, we signify inthe ﬂesh a nasty developmental infection called love. This love is a histor-ical aberration and a naturalcultural legacy.18In my experience, when people hear the term companion species,they tendto start talking about “companion animals,” such as dogs, cats, horses,miniature donkeys, tropical ﬁsh, fancy bunnies, dying baby turtles, antfarms, parrots, tarantulas in harness, and Vietnamese potbellied pigs.Many of those critters, but far from all and none without very noninno-cent histories, do ﬁt readily into the early twenty-ﬁrst-century globalizedand ﬂexible category of companion animals. Historically situated animalsin companionate relations with equally situated humans are, of course,major players in When Species Meet.But the category “companion spe-cies” is less shapely and more rambunctious than that. Indeed, I ﬁnd thatnotion, which is less a category than a pointer to an ongoing “becomingwith,” to be a much richer web to inhabit than any of the posthumanisms16dWHEN SPECIES MEET




on display after (or in reference to) the ever-deferred demise of man.19Inever wanted to be posthuman, or posthumanist, any more than I wantedto be postfeminist. For one thing, urgent work still remains to be done inreference to those who must inhabit the troubled categories of womanand human, properly pluralized, reformulated, and brought into consti-tutive intersection with other asymmetrical diﬀerences.20Fundamentally,however, it is the patterns of relationality and, in Karen Barad’s terms,intra-actions at many scales of space–time that need rethinking, not get-ting beyond one troubled category for a worse one even more likely to gopostal.21The partners do not precede their relating; all that is, is the fruitof becoming with: those are the mantras of companion species. Even theOxford English Dictionarysays as much. Gorging on etymologies, I willtaste my key words for their ﬂavors.Companioncomes from the Latin cum panis,“with bread.” Mess-mates at table are companions. Comrades are political companions. Acompanion in literary contexts is a vade mecum or handbook, like theOxford Companion to wine or English verse; such companions helpreaders to consume well. Business and commercial associates form a com-pany,a term that is also used for the lowest rank in an order of knights,a guest, a medieval trade guild, a ﬂeet of merchant ships, a local unit of theGirl Guides, a military unit, and colloquially for the Central IntelligenceAgency. As a verb, to companionis “to consort, to keep company,” with sex-ual and generative connotations always ready to erupt.Species,like all the old and important words, is equally promiscuous,but in the visual register rather than the gustatory. The Latin specereisat the root of things here, with its tones of “to look” and “to behold.” Inlogic, speciesrefers to a mental impression or idea, strengthening thenotion that thinking and seeing are clones. Referring both to the relent-lessly “speciﬁc” or particular and to a class of individuals with the samecharacteristics, speciescontains its own opposite in the most promising—or special—way. Debates about whether species are earthly organic enti-ties or taxonomic conveniences are coextensive with the discourse we call“biology.” Species is about the dance linking kin and kind. The ability tointerbreed reproductively is the rough and ready requirement for mem-bers of the same biological species; all those lateral gene exchangers suchas bacteria have never made very good species. Also, biotechnologicallyWHEN SPECIES MEETd17




mediated gene transfers redo kin and kind at rates and in patterns un -precedented on earth, generating messmates at table who do not knowhow to eat well and, in my judgment, often should not be guests togetherat all. Which companion species will, and should, live and die, and how,is at stake.The word speciesalso structures conservation and environmentaldiscourses, with their “endangered species” that function simultaneouslyto locate value and to evoke death and extinction in ways familiar in colo-nial representations of the always vanishing indigene. The discursive tiebetween the colonized, the enslaved, the noncitizen, and the animal—allreduced to type, all Others to rational man, and all essential to his brightconstitution—is at the heart of racism and ﬂourishes, lethally, in the en -trails of humanism. Woven into that tie in all the categories is “woman’s”putative self-deﬁning responsibility to “the species,” as this singular andtypological female is reduced to her reproductive function. Fecund, shelies outside the bright territory of man even as she is his conduit. Thelabeling of African American men in the United States as an “endangeredspecies” makes palpable the ongoing animalization that fuels liberal andconservative racialization alike. Speciesreeks of race and sex; and whereand when species meet, that heritage must be untied and better knots ofcompanion species attempted within and across diﬀerences. Loosening thegrip of analogies that issue in the collapse of all of man’s others into oneanother, companion species must instead learn to live intersectionally.22Raised a Roman Catholic, I grew up knowing that the Real Pres-ence was present under both “species,” the visible form of the bread andthe wine. Sign and ﬂesh, sight and food, never came apart for me againafter seeing and eating that hearty meal. Secular semiotics never nour-ished as well or caused as much indigestion. That fact made me ready tolearn that species is related to spice. A kind of atom or molecule, spe-cies is also a composition used in embalming. “The species” often meansthe human race, unless one is attuned to science ﬁction, where speciesabound.23It would be a mistake to assume much about species in ad-vance of en counter. Finally, we come to metal coinage, “specie,” stampedin the proper shape and kind. Like company,speciesalso signiﬁes andembodies wealth. I remember Marx on the topic of gold, alert to all itsﬁlth and glitter.18dWHEN SPECIES MEET




Looking back in this way takes us to seeing again, to respecere,to theact of respect. To hold in regard, to respond, to look back reciprocally, tonotice, to pay attention, to have courteous regard for, to esteem: all of thatis tied to polite greeting, to constituting the polis, where and when speciesmeet. To knot companion and species together in encounter, in regardand respect, is to enter the world of becoming with, where who and whatareis precisely what is at stake. In “Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Com-panion Species,” Anna Tsing writes, “Human nature is an interspeciesrelationship.”24That realization, in Beatriz Preciado’s idiom, promisesan autre-mondialisation. Species interdependence is the name of theworlding game on earth, and that game must be one of response andrespect. That is the play of companion species learning to pay attention.Not much is excluded from the needed play, not technologies, commerce,organisms, landscapes, peoples, practices. I am not a posthumanist; I amwho I become with companion species, who and which make a mess outof categories in the making of kin and kind. Queer messmates in mortalplay, indeed.AND SAY THE PHILOSOPHER RESPONDED?WHEN ANIMALS LOOK BACK“And Say the Animal Responded?” is the title Derrida gave his lec-ture in which he tracked the old philosophical scandal of judging “theanimal” to be capable only of reaction as an animal–machine. That’s awonderful title and a crucial question. I think Derrida accomplishedimportant work in that lecture and the published essay that followed, butsomething that was oddly missing became clearer in another lecture inthe same series, translated into English as “The Animal That Therefore IAm (More to Follow).”25He understood that actual animals look back atactual human beings; he wrote at length about a cat, his small female cat,in a particular bathroom on a real morning actually looking at him. “Thecat I am talking about is a real cat, truly, believe me, a little cat.It isn’tthe ﬁgureof a cat. It doesn’t silently enter the room as an allegory for allthe cats on the earth, the felines that traverse myths and religions, litera-tures and fables” (). Further, Derrida knew he was in the presence ofsomeone, not of a machine reacting. “I see it as thisirreplaceable livingWHEN SPECIES MEETd19




being that one day enters my space, enters this place where it can en -counter me, see me, see me naked” (–). He identiﬁed the key ques-tion as being not whether the cat could “speak” but whether it is possibleto know what respondmeans and how to distinguish a response from areaction, for human beings as well as for anyone else. He did not fallinto the trap of making the subaltern speak: “It would not be a matter of‘giving speech back’ to animals but perhaps acceding to a thinking . . . thatthinks the absence of the name as something other than a privation”().Yet he did not seriously consider an alternative form of engagementeither, one that risked knowing something more about cats and how tolook back,perhaps even scientiﬁcally, biologically, and thereforealso philo-sophically and intimately.He came right to the edge of respect, of the move to respecere,buthe was sidetracked by his textual canon of Western philosophy and liter-ature and by his own linked worries about being naked in front of his cat.He knew there is no nudity among animals, that the worry was his, evenas he understood the fantastic lure of imagining he could write nakedwords. Somehow in all this worrying and longing, the cat was never heardfrom again in the long essay dedicated to the crime against animals per-petrated by the great Singularities separating the Animal and the Humanin the canon Derrida so passionately read and reread so that it couldnever be read the same way again.26For those readings I and my peopleare permanently in his debt.But with his cat, Derrida failed a simple obligation of companionspecies; he did not become curious about what the cat might actually bedoing, feeling, thinking, or perhaps making available to him in lookingback at him that morning. Derrida is among the most curious of men,among the most committed and able of philosophers to spot what arrestscuriosity, instead nurturing an entanglement and a generative interrup-tion called response. Derrida is relentlessly attentive to and humble beforewhat he does not know. Besides all that, his own deep interest in animalsis coextensive with his practice as a philosopher. The textual evidence isubiquitous. What happened that morning was, to me, shocking becauseof what I know this philosopher can do. Incurious, he missed a possibleinvitation, a possible introduction to other-worlding. Or, if he was curi-ous when he ﬁrst really noticed his cat looking at him that morning, he20dWHEN SPECIES MEET




arrested that lure to deconstructive communication with the sort of crit-ical gesture that he would never have allowed to stop him in his canoni-cal philosophical reading and writing practices.Rejecting the facile and basically imperialist, if generally well-intentioned, move of claiming to see from the point of view of the other,Derrida correctly criticized two kinds of representations, one set fromthose who observe real animals and write about them but never meettheir gaze, and the other set from those who engage animals only as liter-ary and mythological ﬁgures (–). He did not explicitly considerethologists and other animal behavioral scientists, but inasmuch as theyengage animals as objects of their vision, not as beings who look back andwhose look their own intersects, with consequences for all that follows,the same criticism would apply. Why, though, should that criticism be theend of the matter for Derrida?What if not all such Western human workers with animals haverefused the risk of an intersecting gaze, even if it usually has to be teasedout from the repressive literary conventions of scientiﬁc publishing anddescriptions of method? This is not an impossible question; the literatureis large, complemented by a much larger oral culture among biologists aswell as others who earn their livings in interaction with animals. Someastute thinkers who work and play with animals scientiﬁcally and profes-sionally have discussed at some length this sort of issue. I am leaving asideentirely the philosophicalthinking that goes on in popular idioms andpublishing, not to mention the entire world of people thinking and engag-ing with animals who are not shaped by the institutionalized so-calledWestern philosophical and literary canon.Positive knowledge of and with animals might just be possible,knowledge that is positive in quite a radical sense if it is not built on theGreat Divides. Why did Derrida not ask, even in principle, if a GregoryBateson or Jane Goodall or Marc Bekoﬀor Barbara Smuts or many othershave met the gaze of living, diverse animals and in response undone andredone themselves and their sciences? Their kind of positive knowledgemight even be what Derrida would recognize as a mortal and ﬁnite know-ing that understands “the absence of the name as something other than aprivation.” Why did Derrida leave unexamined the practices of commu-nication outside the writing technologies he did know how to talk about?WHEN SPECIES MEETd21




Leaving this query unasked, he had nowhere else to go with his keenrecognition of the gaze of his cat than to Jeremy Bentham’s question:“The ﬁrstand decisivequestion will rather be to know whether animalscan suﬀer. . . . Once its protocol is established, the form of this questionchanges everything” (). I would not for a minute deny the importanceof the question of animals’ suﬀering and the criminal disregard of itthroughout human orders, but I do not think that is the decisive ques-tion, the one that turns the order of things around, the one that promisesan autre-mondialisation. The question of suﬀering led Derrida to thevirtue of pity, and that is not a small thing. But how much more promiseis in the questions, Can animals play? Or work? And even, can I learn toplay with thiscat? Can I, the philosopher, respond to an invitation or rec-ognize one when it is oﬀered? What if work and play, and not just pity,open up when the possibility of mutual response, without names, is takenseriously as an everyday practice available to philosophy and to science?What if a usable word for this is joy?And what if the question of how ani-mals engage one another’sgaze responsivelytakes center stage for people?What if that is the query, once its protocol is properly established,whoseform changes everything?27My guess is that Derrida the man in the bath-room grasped all this, but Derrida the philosopher had no idea how topractice this sort of curiosity that morning with his highly visual cat.Therefore, as a philosopher he knew nothing more from, about, andwiththe cat at the end of the morning than he knew at the beginning, nomatter how much better he understood the root scandal as well as theenduring achievements of his textual legacy. Actually to respond to thecat’s response to his presence would have required his joining that ﬂawedbut rich philosophical canon to the risky project of asking what this caton this morning cared about, what these bodily postures and visual en -tanglements might mean and might invite, as well as reading what peoplewho study cats have to say and delving into the developing knowledgesof both cat–cat and cat–human behavioral semiotics when species meet.Instead, he concentrated on his shame in being naked before this cat.Shame trumped curiosity, and that does not bode well for an autre-mondialisation. Knowing that in the gaze of the cat was “an existencethat refuses to be conceptualized,” Derrida did not “go on as if he hadnever been looked at,” never addressed, which was the fundamental gaﬀe22dWHEN SPECIES MEET




he teased out of his canonical tradition (, ). Unlike EmmanuelLévinas, Derrida, to his credit, recognized in his small cat “the absolutealterity of the neighbor” ().28Further, instead of a primal scene of Manconfronting Animal, Derrida gave us the provocation of a historicallylocated look. Still, shame is not an adequate response to our inheritanceof multispecies histories, even at their most brutal. Even if the cat didnot become a symbol of all cats, the naked man’s shame quickly became aﬁgure for the shame of philosophy before all of the animals. That ﬁguregenerated an important essay. “The animal looks at us, and we are nakedbefore it. Thinking perhaps begins there” ().But whatever else the cat might have been doing, Derrida’s fullhuman male frontal nudity before an Other, which was of such interestin his philosophical tradition, was of no consequence to her, except asthe distraction that kept her human from giving or receiving an ordinarypolite greeting. I am prepared to believe that he did know how to greetthis cat and began each morning in that mutually responsive and politedance, but if so, that embodied mindful encounter did not motivate hisphilosophy in public. That is a pity.For help, I turn to someone who did learn to look back, as well asto recognize that she was looked at, as a core work-practice for doing herscience. To respond was to respect; the practice of “becoming with”rewove the ﬁbers of the scientist’s being. Barbara Smuts is now a bioan-thropologist at the University of Michigan, but as a Stanford Universitygraduate student in , she went to Tanzania’s Gombe Stream preserveto study chimpanzees. After being kidnapped and ransomed in the tur-bulent nationalist and anticolonial human politics of that area of theworld in the mid-s, she ended up studying baboons in Kenya for herPhD.29About baboons called the Eburru Cliﬀs troop lived arounda rocky outcropping of the Great Rift Valley near Lake Naivasha. In awonderful understatement, Smuts writes, “At the beginning of my study,the baboons and I deﬁnitely did not see eye to eye.”30She wanted to get as close as possible to the baboons to collect datato address her research questions; the monkeys wanted to get as far awayfrom her threatening self as possible. Trained in the conventions of ob-jective science, Smuts had been advised to be as neutral as possible, tobe like a rock, to be unavailable, so that eventually the baboons would goWHEN SPECIES MEETd23




on about their business in nature as if data-collecting humankind werenot present. Good scientists were those who, learning to be invisiblethemselves, could see the scene of nature close up, as if through a peep-hole. The scientists could query but not be queried. People could askif baboons are or are not social subjects, or ask anything else for thatmatter, without any ontological risk either to themselves, except maybebeing bitten by an angry baboon or contracting a dire parasitic infec-tion, or to their culture’s dominant epistemologies about what are namednature and culture.Along with more than a few other primatologists who talk, if notwrite in professional journals, about how the animals come to accept thepresence of working scientists, Smuts recognized that the baboons wereunimpressed by her rock act. They frequently looked at her, and the moreshe ignored their looks, the less satisﬁed they seemed. Progress in whatscientists call “habituation” of the animals to the human being’s would-benonpresence was painfully slow. It seemed like the only critter to whomthe supposedly neutral scientist was invisible was herself. Ignoring socialcues is far from neutral social behavior. I imagine the baboons as seeingsomebody oﬀ-category, not something, and asking if that being were orwere not educable to the standard of a polite guest. The monkeys, inshort, inquired if the woman was as good a social subject as an ordi-nary baboon, with whom one could ﬁgure out how to carry on relation-ships, whether hostile, neutral, or friendly. The question was not, Are thebaboons social subjects? but, Is the human being? Not, Do the baboonshave “face”? but, Do people?Smuts began adjusting what she did—and who she was—accordingto the baboons’ social semiotics directed both to her and to one another.“I . . . in the process of gaining their trust, changed almost everythingabout me, including the way I walked and sat, the way I held my body,and the way I used my eyes and voice. I was learning a whole new way ofbeing in the world—the way of the baboon. . . . I was responding to the cuesthe baboons used to indicate their emotions, motivations and intentionsto one another, and I was gradually learning to send such signals back tothem. As a result, instead of avoiding me when I got too close, they startedgiving me very deliberate dirty looks, which made me move away. This maysound like a small shift, but in fact it signaled a profound change from24dWHEN SPECIES MEET




being treated like an objectthat elicited a unilateral response (avoidable), tobeing recognized as a subjectwith whom they could communicate” ().In the philosopher’s idiom, the human being acquired a face. The resultwas that the baboons treated her more and more as a reliable social beingwho would move away when told to do so and around whom it might besafe to carry on monkey life without a lot of fuss over her presence.Having earned status as a baboon-literate casual acquaintance andsometimes even a familiar friend, Smuts was able to collect data and earna PhD. She did not shift her questions to study baboon–human interac-tions, but only through mutual acknowledgment could the human beingand baboons go on about their business. If she really wanted to studysomething other than how human beings are in the way, if she was reallyinterested in these baboons, Smuts had to enter into, not shun, a respon-sive relationship. “By acknowledging a baboon’s presence, I expressed re -spect, and by responding in ways I picked up from them, I let the baboonsknow that my intentions were benign and that I assumed they likewisemeant me no harm. Once this was clearly established in both directions,we could relax in each other’s company” ().Writing about these introductions to baboon social niceties, Smutssaid, “The baboons remained themselves, doing what they always did inthe world they always lived in” (). In other words, her idiom leaves thebaboons in nature, where change involves only the time of evolution, andperhaps ecological crisis, and the human being in history, where all othersorts of time come into play. Here is where I think Derrida and Smutsneed each other. Or maybe it is just my monomania to place baboons andhumans together in situated histories, situated naturecultures, in whichall the actors become who they are in the dance of relating,not fromscratch, not ex nihilo, but full of the patterns of their sometimes-joined,sometimes-separate heritages both before and lateral to thisencounter.All the dancers are redone through the patterns they enact. The tempo-ralities of companion species comprehend all the possibilities activated inbecoming with, including the heterogeneous scales of evolutionary timefor everybody but also the many other rhythms of conjoined process. Ifwe know how to look, I think we would see that the baboons of EburruCliﬀs were redone too, in baboon ways, by having entangled their gazewith that of this young clipboard-toting human female. The relationshipsWHEN SPECIES MEETd25




are the smallest possible patterns for analysis;31the partners and actorsare their still-ongoing products. It is all extremely prosaic, relentlesslymundane, and exactly how worlds come into being.32Smuts herself holds a theory very like this one in “Embodied Com-munication in Nonhuman Animals,” a reprise of her study of theEburru Cliﬀs baboons and elaboration of daily, ongoing negotiated re -sponses between herself and her dog Bahati.33In this study, Smuts isstruck by the frequent enactments of brief greeting rituals between beingswho know each other well, such as between baboons in the same troopand between herself and Bahati. Among baboons, both friends and non-friends greet one another all the time, and who they are is in constantbecoming in these rituals. Greeting rituals are ﬂexible and dynamic, re-arranging pace and elements within the repertoire that the partners alreadyshare or can cobble together. Smuts deﬁnes a greeting ritual as a kind ofembodied communication, which takes place in entwined, semiotic, over-lapping, somatic patterning over time, not as discrete, denotative signalsemitted by individuals. An embodied communication is more like a dancethan a word. The ﬂow of entangled meaningful bodies in time—whetherjerky and nervous or ﬂaming and ﬂowing, whether both partners move inharmony or painfully out of synch or something else altogether—is com-munication about relationship, the relationship itself, and the means ofreshaping relationship and so its enacters.34Gregory Bateson would saythat this is what human and nonhuman mammalian nonlinguistic com-munication fundamentally is, that is, communication about relationshipand the material–semiotic means of relating.35As Smuts puts it, “Changesin greetings area change in the relationship” (). She goes further: “Withlanguage, it is possible to lie and say we like someone when we don’t.However, if the above speculations are correct, closely interacting bodiestend to tell the truth” ().This is a very interesting deﬁnition of truth, one rooted in material–semiotic dancing in which all the partners have face, but no one relies onnames. That kind of truth does not ﬁt easily into any of the inheritedcategories of human or nonhuman, nature or culture. I like to think thatthis is one treasure for Derrida’s hunt to “think the absence of the nameas something other than a privation.” I suspect this is one of the thingsmy fellow competitors and I in the dog–human sport called agility mean26dWHEN SPECIES MEET




when we say our dogs are “honest.” I am certain we are not referring to thetired philosophical and linguistic arguments about whether dogs can lie,and if so, lie about lying. The truth or honesty of nonlinguistic embodiedcommunication depends on looking back and greeting signiﬁcant others,again and again. This sort of truth or honesty is not some trope-free,fantastic kind of natural authenticity that only animals can have whilehumans are deﬁned by the happy fault of lying denotatively and knowingit. Rather, this truth telling is about co-constitutive naturalcultural dancing,holding in esteem, and regard open to those who look back reciprocally.Always tripping, this kind of truth has a multispecies future. Respecere.BECOMING-ANIMAL OR SETTING OUT THETWENTY-THIRD BOWL?The making each other available to events that is the dance of “becom-ing with” has no truck with the fantasy wolf-pack version of “becoming-animal” ﬁgured in Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s famous sectionof A Thousand Plateaus,“: Becoming-Intense, Becoming-Animal,Becoming-Imperceptible.”36Mundane, prosaic, living wolves have no truckwith that kind of wolf pack, as we will see at the end of these introduc-tions, when dogs, wolves, and people become available to one anotherin risky worldings. But ﬁrst, I want to explain why writing in which Ihad hoped to ﬁnd an ally for the tasks of companion species instead mademe come as close as I get to announcing, “Ladies and Gentlemen, beholdthe enemy!”I want to stay a while with “Becoming-Intense, Becoming-Animal,Becoming-Imperceptible,” because it works so hard to get beyond theGreat Divide between humans and other critters to ﬁnd the rich multi-plicities and topologies of a heterogeneously and nonteleologically con-nected world. I want to understand why Deleuze and Guattari here leaveme so angry when what we want seems so similar. Despite much that Ilove in other work of Deleuze, here I ﬁnd little but the two writers’ scornfor all that is mundane and ordinary and the profound absence of curios-ity about or respect for and with actual animals, even as innumerable ref-erences to diverse animals are invoked to ﬁgure the authors’ anti-Oedipaland anticapitalist project. Derrida’s actual little cat is decidedly not invitedWHEN SPECIES MEETd27




into this encounter. No earthly animal would look twice at these authors,at least not in their textual garb in this chapter.A Thousand Plateausis a part of the writers’ sustained work againstthe monomaniacal, cyclopean, individuated Oedipal subject, who is riv-eted on daddy and lethal in culture, politics, and philosophy. Patrilinealthinking, which sees all the world as a tree of ﬁliations ruled by genealogyand identity, wars with rhizomatic thinking, which is open to nonhierar-chical becomings and contagions. So far, so good. Deleuze and Guattarisketch a quick history of European ideas from eighteenth-century naturalhistory (relations recognized through proportionality and resemblance,series and structure), through evolutionism (relations ordered throughdescent and ﬁliation), to becomings (relations patterned through “sorcery”or alliance). “Becoming is always of a diﬀerent order than ﬁliation. Itconcerns alliance” (). The normal and abnormal rule in evolutionism;the anomaly, which is outside rules, is freed in the lines of ﬂight of be-comings. “Molar unities” must give way to “molecular multiplicities.” “Theanomalous is neither individual nor species; it has only aﬀects, infections,horror . . . a phenomenon of bordering” (–). And then, “We opposeepidemic to ﬁliation, contagion to heredity, peopling by contagion to sex-ual reproduction, sexual production. Bands, human or animal, proliferateby contagion, epidemics, battleﬁelds, and catastrophes. . . . All we are say-ing is that animals are packs, and packs form, develop, and are trans-formed by contagion. . . . Wherever there is multiplicity, you will ﬁnd alsoan exceptional individual, and it is with that individual that an alliancemust be made in order to become-animal” (–). This is a philosophyof the sublime, not the earthly, not the mud; becoming-animal is not anautre-mondialisation.Earlier in A Thousand Plateaus,Deleuze and Guattari conducted asmart, mean critique of Freud’s analysis of the famous case of the Wolf-Man, in which their opposition of dog and wolf gave me the key to howD&G’s associational web of anomalous becoming-animal feeds oﬀaseries of primary dichotomies ﬁgured by the opposition between the wildand the domestic. “That day the Wolf-Man rose from the couch particu-larly tired. He knew that Freud had a genius for brushing up against thetruth and passing it by, and then ﬁlling the void with associations. Heknew that Freud knew nothing about wolves, or anuses for that matter.28dWHEN SPECIES MEET




The only thing Freud understood was what a dog is, and a dog’s tail” ().This gibe is the ﬁrst of a crowd of oppositions of dog and wolf in A Thou-sand Plateaus,which taken together are a symptomatic morass for how notto take earthly animals—wild or domestic—seriously. In honor of Freud’sfamously irascible chows, no doubt sleeping on the ﬂoor during the Wolf-Man’s sessions, I brace myself to go on by studying the artist DavidGoines’s Chinese Year of the Dog poster for : one of the most gor-geous chow chows I have ever seen. Indiﬀerent to the charms of a blue-purple tongue, D&G knew how to kick the psychoanalyst where it wouldhurt, but they had no eye for the elegant curve of a good chow’s tail, muchless the courage to look such a dog in the eye.But the wolf/dog opposition is not funny. D&G express horrorat the “individuated animals, family pets, sentimental Oedipal animalseach with its own petty history” who invite only regression ().37Allworthy animals are a pack; all the rest are either pets of the bourgeoisieor state animals symbolizing some kind of divine myth.38The pack, orpure-aﬀect animals, are intensive, not extensive, molecular and excep-tional, not petty and molar—sublime wolf packs, in short. I don’t think itneeds comment that we will learn nothing about actual wolves in all this.I know that D&G set out to write not a biological treatise but rather aphilosophical, psychoanalytic, and literary one requiring diﬀerent readinghabits for the always nonmimetic play of life and narrative. But no read-ing strategies can mute the scorn for the homely and the ordinary in thisbook. Leaving behind the traps of singularity and identity is possiblewithout the lubrication of sublime ecstasy bordering on the intensiveaﬀect of the Futurist Manifesto. D&G continue, “Anyone who likescats or dogs is a fool” (, italics in original). I don’t think Deleuze hereis thinking of Dostoevsky’s idiot, who slows things down and whomDeleuze loves. D&G go on: Freud knows only the “dog in the kennel, theanalyst’s bow wow.” Never have I felt more loyal to Freud. D&G go evenfurther in their disdain for the daily, the ordinary, the aﬀectional ratherthan the sublime. The Unique, the one in a pact with a demon, the sor-cerer’s anomaly, is both pack and Ahab’s leviathan in Moby Dick,theexceptional, not in the sense of a competent and skillful animal webbedin the open with others, but in the sense of what is without characteris-tics and without tenderness (). From the point of view of the animalWHEN SPECIES MEETd29




worlds I inhabit, this is not about a good run but about a bad trip. Alongwith the Beatles, I need a little more help than that from my friends.Little house dogs and the people who love them are the ultimateﬁgure of abjection for D&G, especially if those people are elderly women,the very type of the sentimental. “Ahab’s Moby Dick is not like the littlecat or dog owned by an elderly woman who honors and cherishes it.Lawrence’s becoming-tortoise has nothing to do with a sentimental ordomestic relation. . . . But the objection is raised against Lawrence:‘Your tortoises are not real!’ And he answers: ‘Possibly, but my becom-ing is, . . . even and especially if you have no way of judging it, becauseyou’re just little house dogs’” (). “My becoming” seems awfully im-portant in a theory opposed to the strictures of individuation and sub-ject. The old, female, small, dog- and cat-loving: these are who and whatmust be vomited out by those who will become-animal. Despite thekeen competition, I am not sure I can ﬁnd in philosophy a clearer dis-play of misogyny, fear of aging, incuriosity about animals, and horrorat the ordinariness of ﬂesh, here covered by the alibi of an anti-Oedipaland anticapitalist project. It took some nerve for D&G to write aboutbecoming-woman just a few pages later! (–).39It is almost enoughto make me go out and get a toy poodle for my next agility dog; I know aremarkable one playing with her human for the World Cup these days.That isexceptional.It is a relief to return from my own ﬂights of fancy of becoming-intense in the agility World Cup competitions to the mud and the slimeof my proper home world, where my biological soul travels with thatwolf found near the edge of the forest who was raised by scientists.At least as many nonarboreal shapes of relatedness can be found inthese not-always-salubrious viscous ﬂuids as among Deleuze and Guat-tari’s rhizomatic anomalies. Playing in the mud, I can even appreciatea great deal of A Thousand Plateaus.Companion species are familiarwith oddly shaped ﬁgures of kin and kind, in which arboreal descent isboth a late comer to the play of bodies and never uniquely in charge ofthe material–semiotic action. In their controversial theory of AcquiringGenomes, Lynn Margulis and her son and collaborator, Dorion Sagan,give me the ﬂesh and ﬁgures that companion species need to understandtheir messmates.4030dWHEN SPECIES MEET




Reading Margulis over the years, I get the idea that she believeseverything interesting on earth happened among the bacteria, and all therest is just elaboration, most certainly including wolf packs. Bacteria passgenes back and forth all the time and do not resolve into well-boundedspecies, giving the taxonomist either an ecstatic moment or a headache.“The creative force of symbiosis produced eukaryotic cells from bacteria.Hence all larger organisms—protests, fungi, animals, and plants—origi-nated symbiogenetically. But creation of novelty by symbiosis did not endwith the evolution of the earliest nucleated cells. Symbiosis still is every-where” (–). Margulis and Sagan give examples from Paciﬁc coralreefs, squid and their luminescent symbionts, New England lichens, milkcows, and New Guinea ant plants, among others. The basic story is sim-ple: ever more complex life forms are the continual result of ever moreintricate and multidirectional acts of association of and with other lifeforms. Trying to make a living, critters eat critters but can only partlydigest one another. Quite a lot of indigestion, not to mention excretion,is the natural result, some of which is the vehicle for new sorts of com-plex patternings of ones and manys in entangled association. And someof that indigestion and voiding are just acidic reminders of mortalitymade vivid in the experience of pain and systemic breakdown, from thelowliest among us to the most eminent. Organisms are ecosystems ofgenomes, consortia, communities, partly digested dinners, mortal bound-ary formations. Even toy dogs and fat old ladies on city streets are suchboundary formations; studying them “ecologically” would show it.Eating one another and developing indigestion are only one kind oftransformative merger practice; living critters form consortia in a baroquemedley of inter- and intra-actions. Margulis and Sagan put it more elo-quently when they write that to be an organism is to be the fruit of“the co-opting of strangers, the involvement and infolding of others intoever more complex and miscegenous genomes. . . . The acquisition of thereproducing other, of the microbe and the genome, is no mere sideshow.Attraction, merger, fusion, incorporation, co-habitation, recombination—both permanent and cyclical—and other forms of forbidden couplings,are the main sources of Darwin’s missing variation” (). Yoking to -gether all the way down is what sym-bio-genesis means. The shapeand temporality of life on earth are more like a liquid–crystal consortiumWHEN SPECIES MEETd31




32dWHEN SPECIES MEETfolding on itself again and again than a well-branched tree. Ordinaryidentities emerge and are rightly cherished, but they remain always a rela-tional web opening to non-Euclidean pasts, presents, and futures. Theordinary is a multipartner mud dance issuing from and in entangledspecies. It is turtles all the way down; the partners do not preexist theirconstitutive intra-action at every folded layer of time and space.41Theseare the contagions and infections that wound the primary narcissism ofthose who still dream of human exceptionalism. These are also the cob-blings to gether that give meaning to the “becoming with” of companionspecies in naturecultures. Cum panis,messmates, to look and to lookback, to have truck with: those are the names of my game.One aspect of Margulis and Sagan’s exposition seems unnecessarilyhard for companion species to digest, however, and a more easily assimi-lated theory is cooking. In opposition to various mechanistic theories ofthe organism, Margulis has long been committed to the notion of autopoie -sis. Autopoiesis is self-making, in which self-maintaining entities (thesmallest biological unit of which is a living cell) develop and sustain theirown form, drawing on the enveloping ﬂows of matter and energy.42In thiscase, I think Margulis would do better with Deleuze and Guattari, whoseworld did not build on complex self-referential units of diﬀerentiation oron Gaian systems, cybernetic or otherwise, but built on a diﬀerent kindof “turtles all the way down,” ﬁguring relentless otherness knotted intonever fully bounded or fully self-referential entities. I am instructed bydevelopmental biologist Scott Gilbert’s critique of autopoiesis for itsemphasis on self-building and self-maintaining systems, closed except fornourishing ﬂows of matter and energy. Gilbert stresses that nothing makesitself in the biological world, but rather reciprocal induction within andbetween always-in-process critters ramiﬁes through space and time onboth large and small scales in cascades of inter- and intra-action. Inembryology, Gilbert calls this “interspecies epigenesis.”43Gilbert writes:“I think that the ideas that Lynn [Margulis] and I have are very similar;it’s just that she was focusing on adults and I want to extend the concept(as I think the science allows it to be fully extended) to embryos. I believethat the embryonicco-construction of the physical bodies has many moreimplications because it means that we were ‘never’ individuals.” LikeMargulis and Sagan, Gilbert stresses that the cell (not the genome) is the




smallest unit of structure and function in the biological world, and heargues that “the morphogenetic ﬁeld can be seen as a major unit of onto-genetic and evolutionary change.”44As I read him, Gilbert’s approach is not a holistic systems theoryin the sense that Margulis and Sagan lean toward, and his fractal “turtlesall the way down” arguments do not posit a self-referential unit of diﬀer-entiation. Such a unit cheats on the turtles pile, whether up or down.Software engineer Rusten Hogness suggests the term turtling all the waydownmight better express Gilbert’s kind of recursivity.45I think that forGilbert the noun diﬀerentiationis permanently a verb, within which mor-tal knots of partly structured diﬀerence are in play. In my view, Margulisand Sagan’s symbiogenesis is not really compatible with their theory ofautopoiesis, and the alternative is not an additive mechanistic theorybut a going even more deeply into diﬀerentiation.46A nice touch is thatGilbert and his students literally work on turtle embryogeny, studying theinductions and cell migrations that result in the turtle’s plastron on itsbelly surface. Layers of turtling, indeed.All of that takes us to the ethologist Thelma Rowell’s practice ofsetting out a twenty-third bowl in her farmyard in Lancashire when shehas only twenty-two sheep to feed. Her Soay sheep crunch grass on thehillsides most of the day, forming their own social groups without a lotof interference. Such restraint is a revolutionary act among most sheepfarmers, who rob sheep of virtually every decision until whole breeds maywell have lost the capacity to ﬁnd their way in life without overweeninghuman supervision. Rowell’s empowered sheep, belonging to a so-calledprimitive breed recalcitrant to meat–industrial standardization and be -havioral ruination, have addressed many of her questions, not least tellingher that even domesticated sheep have social lives and abilities as complexas those of the baboons and other monkeys she studied for decades.Probably descended from a population of feral sheep thought to havebeen deposited on the island of Soay in the St. Kilda archipelago some-time in the Bronze Age, Soay sheep are today the subject of attention byrare breed societies in the United Kingdom and the United States.47Focused on weighty matters such as feed conversion rates, scandal-ized sheep scientists with an agribusiness emphasis rejected Rowell’s ﬁrstpapers on feral ram groups when she submitted them (the manuscripts,WHEN SPECIES MEETd33




not the sheep) for publication. But good scientists have a way of nibblingaway at prejudice with mutated questions and lovely data, which worksat least sometimes.48Scottish blackface hill sheep, Rowell’s numericallydominant ovine neighbors in Lancashire, and the lowland Dorset white-faced breed, mostly on the English Downs, seem to have forgotten howto testify to a great deal of sheep competence. They and their equivalentsaround the world are the sorts of ovids most familiar to the sheep ex-perts reviewing papers for the journals—at least for the journals in whichsheep usually show up, that is, notthe behavioral ecology, integrativebiology, and evolution journals in which nondomestic species seem the“natural” subjects of attention. But in the context of the ranching andfarming practices that led to today’s global agribusiness, maybe those“domestic” ovine eating machines are rarely asked an interesting question.Not brought into the open with their people, and so with no experienceof jointly becoming available, these sheep do not “become with” a curi-ous scientist.There is a disarmingly literal quality to having truck with Rowelland her critters. Rowell brings her competent sheep into the yard mostdays so that she can ask them some more questions while they snack.There, the twenty-two sheep ﬁnd twenty-three bowls spaced around theyard. That homely twenty-third bowl is the open,49the space of what isnot yet and may or may not ever be; it is a making available to events; itis asking the sheep and the scientists to be smart in their exchanges bymaking it possible for something unexpected to happen. Rowell practicesthe virtue of worldly politeness—not a particularly gentle art—with hercolleagues and her sheep, just as she used to do with her primate subjects.“Interesting research is research on the conditions that make somethinginteresting.”50Always having a bowl that is not occupied provides an extraplace to go for any sheep displaced by his or her socially assertive fellowovid. Rowell’s approach is deceptively simple. Competition is so easy tosee; eating is so readily observed and of such consuming interest to farm-ers. What else might be happening? Might what is not so easy to learn tosee be what is of the utmost importance to the sheep in their daily doingsand their evolutionary history? Might it be that thinking again about thehistory of predation and the smart predilections of prey will tell us some-thing surprising and important about ovine worlds even on Lancashire34dWHEN SPECIES MEET




hillsides, or on islands oﬀthe coast of Scotland, where a wolf has not beenseen for centuries?Always a maverick alert to complexity in its details rather than ingrand pronouncements, Rowell regularly discomﬁted her human col-leagues when she studied monkeys, beginning with her s accounts offorest baboons in Uganda who did not act according to their supposedspecies script.51Rowell is among the most satisfyingly opinionated, em -pirically grounded, theoretically savvy, unself-impressed, and unsparinglyanti-ideological people I have ever met. Forgetting her head-over-heelsinterest in her sheep, seeing her patent love for her obstreperous maleadolescent turkeys on her Lancashire farm in , whom she uncon-vincingly threatened with untimely slaughter for their misdeeds,52toldme a great deal about how she treats both unwary human colleaguesand the opinionated animals whom she has studied over a lifetime. AsVinciane Despret emphasizes in her study, Rowell poses the question ofthe collective in relation to both sheep and people: “Do we prefer livingwith predictable sheep or with sheep that surprise us and that add to ourdeﬁnitions of what ‘being social’ means?”53This is a fundamental worldlyquestion, or what Despret’s colleague Isabelle Stengers might call a cosmo -political query, in which “the cosmos refers to the unknown constitutedby these multiple divergent worlds, and to the articulations of which theycould eventually be capable, as opposed to the temptation of a peaceintended to be ﬁnal.”54Eating lunch with the circa sixty-ﬁve-year-oldRowell and her elderly, cherished, nonherding, pet dog in her farmhousekitchen strewn with scientiﬁc papers and heterogeneous books, my would-be ethnographic self had the distinct sense that Oedipal regression wasnot on the menu among these companion species. Woolf!LIVING HISTORIES IN THE CONTACT ZONE:WOLF TRACKSWhom and what do I touch when I touch my dog? How is becom-ing with a practice of becoming worldly? When species meet, the ques-tion of how to inherit histories is pressing, and how to get on together isat stake. Because I become with dogs, I am drawn into the multispeciesknots that they are tied into and that they retie by their reciprocal action.WHEN SPECIES MEETd35




My premise is that touch ramiﬁes and shapes accountability. Accounta-bility, caring for, being aﬀected, and entering into responsibility are notethical abstractions; these mundane, prosaic things are the result of hav-ing truck with each other.55Touch does not make one small; it peppers itspartners with attachment sites for world making. Touch, regard, lookingback, becoming with—all these make us responsible in unpredictableways for which worlds take shape. In touch and regard, partners willynilly are in the miscegenous mud that infuses our bodies with all thatbrought that contact into being. Touch and regard have consequences.Thus, my introductions in this chapter end in three knots of entangledcompanion species—wolves, dogs, human beings, and more—in threeplaces where an autre-mondialisation is at stake: South Africa, the GolanHeights in Syria, and the countryside of the French Alps.At the oﬀ-leash dog park in Santa Cruz, California, which I fre-quent, people sometimes boast that their largish, prick-eared, shepherd-like mutts are “half wolf.” Sometimes the humans claim that they knowthis for sure but more often rest content with an account that makes theirdogs seem special, close to their storied wild selves. I ﬁnd the genealogi-cal speculations highly unlikely in most cases, partly because it is noteasy to have at hand a breeding wolf with whom a willing dog might mate,and partly because of the same agnosticism with which I and most of mydogland informants greet identiﬁcation of any largish black dog of un-certain provenance as a “half Labrador retriever.” Still, I know wolf–doghybrids do exist rather widely, and my dogs’ playing with a few motleyclaimants tied me into a web of caring. Caring means becoming subject tothe unsettling obligation of curiosity, which requires knowing more at theend of the day than at the beginning. Learning something of the behav-ioral biology of wolf–dog hybrids seemed the least that was required.One of the places that led me, via an article by Robyn Dixon in the LosAngeles Timeson October , , “Orphaned Wolves Face Grim Future,”was to the Tsitsikamma Wolf Sanctuary on the southern coast of SouthAfrica near the town of Storm River.56During the apartheid era, in quasi-secret experiments, scientistsin the service of the white state imported northern gray wolves fromNorth America with the intent of breeding an attack dog with a wolf’ssmarts, stamina, and sense of smell to track down “insurgents” in the harsh36dWHEN SPECIES MEET




borderareas. But the security-apparatus scientists at Roodeplaat BreedingEnterprises found to their dismay that wolf–dog hybrids make particularlybad trained attack dogs, not because of aggressivity or unpredictability(both issues with many of the hybrids discussed in the general litera-ture), but because, besides being hard to train, the wolf–dogs generallydefer to their human pack leaders and fail to take the lead when orderedto do so on counterinsurgency or police patrols. Members of an endan-gered spe cies in much of its former range in North America becamefailed mixed-blood immigrants in the apartheid state intent on enforcingracial purity.After the end of apartheid, both the wolves and the hybrids becamesigniﬁers of security once again, as people terriﬁed for their personal safetyin the ripe, still racialized discourses of criminality rampant in SouthAfrica engaged in a brisk newspaper- and Internet-mediated trade in theanimals. The predictable result has been thousands of animals unable tobe “repatriated” to their continent of origin. Both epidemiologically andgenetically categorically “impure,” these canids enter the cultural categoryof the disposable “homeless,” or in ecological terms “nicheless.” The newstate could not care less what happens to these animate tools of a formerracist regime. Running on private money from rich donors and middle-class, mostly white people, a rescue and sanctuary apparatus of a sort thatis familiar globally to dog people does what it can. This is not an honoredtruth and reconciliation process trying to meet a socially recognized obli-gation to those nonhumans forced into “becoming with” a scientiﬁc racialstate apparatus. The sanctuary practices are private charity directed tononhumans whom many people would see as better killed (euthanized?Is there any “good death” here?) in a nation where unaddressed human eco- nomic misery remains immense. Further, the ﬁnancially strapped sanctu-aries accept only “pure wolves,” though only about two hundred canidscould probably have passed that test in in South Africa, and have noresources for the possibly tens of thousands of hybrids who face, as thenewspaper article headlined, a “grim future.”So, what have I and others who touch and are touched by this storyinherited? Which histories must we live? A short list includes the racialdiscourses endemic to the history of both biology and the nation; the col-lision of endangered species worlds, with their conservation apparatuses,WHEN SPECIES MEETd37




and security discourse worlds, with their criminality and terrorist appa-ratuses; the actual lives and deaths of diﬀerentially situated human beingsand animals shaped by these knots; contending popular and professionalnarratives about wolves and dogs and their consequences for who livesand dies and how; the coshaped histories of human social welfare andanimal welfare organizations; the class-saturated funding apparatuses ofprivate and public animal–human worlds; the development of the cate-gories to contain those, human and nonhuman, who are disposable andkillable; the inextricable tie between North America and South Africa inall these matters; and the stories and actual practices that continue to pro-duce wolf–dog hybrids in unlivable knots, even on a romping-dog beachin Santa Cruz, California. Curiosity gets one into thick mud, but I believethat is the kind of “looking back” and “becoming-with-companions” thatmight matter in making autres-mondialisations more possible.Heading to the Golan Heights after running with the wolves inSouth Africa is hardly restful. Among the last companion-species knotsin which I imagined living was one that in featured Israeli cowboysin occupied Syrian territory riding kibbutz horses to manage their Euro-pean-style cattle among the ruins of Syrian villages and military bases.All I have is a snapshot, one newspaper article in the midst of an ongoingcomplex, bloody, and tragic history.57That snapshot was enough to reshapemy sense of touch while playing with my dogs. The ﬁrst cattle-ranchingkibbutz was founded shortly after ; by about seventeen thou-sand Israelis in thirty-three various sorts of settlements held the territory,pending removal by an ever-receding peace treaty with Syria. Learningtheir new skills on the job, the neophyte ranchers share the land with theIsraeli military and their tanks. Mine ﬁelds still pose dangers for cattle,horses, and people, and ﬁring-range practice vies with grazing for space.The cattle are guarded from the resourceful Syrian wolves, not to men-tion Syrian people periodically repatriating stock, by large white livestockguardian dogs (LGDs), namely, Turkish Akbash dogs. Turkey does playan odd role in the Middle East! With the dogs on duty, the ranchersdo not shoot the wolves. Nothing was said in this Timesarticle aboutwhether they shoot the Syrian “rustlers.” The cattle that the Israelis tookover after the expulsion of the Syrian villagers were small, wiry, capablein the same kinds of ways as Rowell’s nonsheepish sheep, and resistant to38dWHEN SPECIES MEET




the local tick-borne diseases. The European cattle who were imported toreplace the supposedly unmodern Syrian beasts are none of those things.The Israeli ranchers brought the guardian dogs into their operation inthe s in response to the large number of gray wolves, whose numberon the Golan Heights grew signiﬁcantly after the defeat of Syria in reduced the Arab villagers’ hunting pressure on them.The Akbash dogs were the prosaic touch that made the story in thenewspaper of more than passing interest in the huge canvas of fraughtnaturecultures and war in the Middle East. I was a kind of“godhuman” toWillem, a Great Pyrenees livestock guardian dog who worked on land inCalifornia that my family owns with a friend. Willem, his human, Susan,and his breeder and her health and genetics activist peers in dogland havebeen major informants for this book. Willem’s livestock guardian dogpeople are astute participants in the hotly contested dog–wolf–rancher–herbivore–environmentalist–hunter naturecultures of the contemporaryU.S. northern Rocky Mountain region. Willem and my dog Cayenneplayed as puppies and added to the stock of the world’s joy.58This is allquite small and unexceptional—not much of a “line of ﬂight” to delightDeleuze and Guattari here. But it was enough to hail me and maybe usinto curiosity about the naturalcultural politics of wolves, dogs, cattle,ticks, pathogens, tanks, mine ﬁelds, soldiers, displaced villagers, cattlethieves, and settlers become cowboy-style ranchers on still another bitof earth made into a frontier by war, expulsion, occupation, the history ofgenocides, and ramifying insecurity all around. There is no happy endingto oﬀer, no conclusion to this ongoing entanglement, only a sharp re -minder that anywhere one really looks actual living wolves and dogs arewaiting to guide humans into contested worldings. “We found her at theedge of the city; she was raised by wolves.” Like her forest-immigrantcousin, this wolf wore a communications pack that was no stranger to thedevelopment of military technology for command, control, communica-tion, and intelligence.Of course, by the ﬁrst decade of the new millennium, that kind oftelecommunications pack could be ordinary equipment for day walkers inthe mountains, and that is where these introductions will end, but withthe printed word rather than a personal GPS system situating the hiker.In primatologist Allison Jolly, knowing my livestock-guardian-dogWHEN SPECIES MEETd39




passions, sent me a brochure she had picked up on her walking tourthrough the French Alps that summer with her family. The brochure wasin Italian, French, and English, already setting it oﬀfrom unaccommodat -ing monolingual U.S. aids to mountain outings. The transnational pathsthrough the Alps and the urbane, leisured, international hikers expectedon the paths were vividly present. On the cover was an alert, calm GreatPyrenees guardian dog, surrounded by text: “Important notice to walkersand hikers [or on the ﬂip side, ‘Promeneurs, Randonneurs,’ etc.]: In thecourse of your walk, you may encounter the local guarding-dogs. Theseare large white dogs whose task is to guard the ﬂocks.”We are in the midst of reinvented pastoral–tourist economies linkingfoot-traveling humans, meat and ﬁber niche markets that are complexlyboth local and global, restoration ecology and heritage culture projects ofthe European Union, shepherds, ﬂocks, dogs, wolves, bears, and lynxes.The return of previously extirpated predators to parts of their old rangesis a major story of transnational environmental politics and biology. Someof the animals have been deliberately reintroduced after intense captivebreeding programs or with transplants from less-developed countries inthe previous Soviet sphere, where progress-indicating extinctions some-times have not gone as far as in western Europe. Some predators reestab-lished populations on their own when people began trapping and shootingreturnees less often. The wolves newly welcome in the French Alps seemto be oﬀspring of opportunistic canids sidling over from unreliably pro-gressive Italy, which never completely wiped out its wolves. The wolvesgave the LGDs a job deterring lupine (and tourist) depredations on theshepherds’ ﬂocks. After the near destruction of the Great Pyrenees dur-ing the two world wars and the pastoral economic collapse in the Basqueregions, the breed came to the Alps from the mountains for which theyare named, by way of their rescue by the purebred dog fancy, especiallythrough the collecting practices of wealthy women in England and theeastern United States. French dog fanciers learned some of what theyneeded to know about reintroducing their dogs to guarding work fromU.S. LGD people, who had placed dogs on ranches in western states inrecent decades and communicated with their European peers.The knots of technocultural, reinvented pastoral–tourist economiesand ecologies are all over North America too, raising the most basic40dWHEN SPECIES MEET




questions of who belongs where and what ﬂourishing means for whom.Following the dogs and their herbivores and people in order to respondto those questions attaches me again and again to ranching, farming, andeating. In principle if not always in personal and collective action, it is easyto know that factory farming and its sciences and politics must be undone.But what then? How can food security for everybody (not just for the rich,who can forget how important cheap and abundant food is) and multi-species’ coﬂourishing be linked in practice? How can remembering the con-quest of the western states by Anglo settlers and their plants and animalsbecome part of the solution and not another occasion for the pleasurableand individualizing frisson of guilt? Much collaborative and inventivework is under way on these matters, if only we take touch seriously. Bothvegan and nonvegan community food projects with a local and translocalanalysis have made clear the links among safe and fair working conditionsfor people, physically and behaviorally healthy agricultural animals, geneticand other research directed to health and diversity, urban and rural foodsecurity, and enhanced wildlife habitat.59No easy unity is to be foundon these matters, and no answers will make one feel good for long. Butthose are not the goals of companion species. Rather, there are vastly moreattachment sites for participating in the search for more livable “otherworlds” (autres-mondialisations) inside earthly complexity than one couldever have imagined when ﬁrst reaching out to pet one’s dog.The kinds of relatings that these introductions perform entanglea motley crowd of diﬀerentially situated species, including landscapes,animals, plants, microorganisms, people, and technologies. Sometimes apolite introduction brings together two quasi-individuated beings, maybeeven with personal names printed in major newspapers, whose histo-ries can recall comfortable narratives of subjects in encounter, two bytwo. More often, the conﬁgurations of critters have other patterns morereminiscent of a cat’s cradle game of the sort taken for granted by goodecologists, military strategists, political economists, and ethnographers.Whether grasped two-by-two or tangle-by-tangle, attachment sites neededfor meeting species redo everything they touch. The point is not to cele-brate complexity but to become worldly and to respond. Consideringstill live metaphors for this work, John Law and Annemarie Mol helpme think: “Multiplicity, oscillation, mediation, material heterogeneity,WHEN SPECIES MEETd41




performativity, interference . . . there is no resting place in a multiple andpartially connected world.”60My point is simple: Once again we are in a knot of species coshap-ing one another in layers of reciprocating complexity all the way down.Response and respect are possible only in those knots, with actual ani-mals and people looking back at each other, sticky with all their muddledhistories. Appreciation of the complexity is, of course, invited. But moreis required too. Figuring what that more might be is the work of situatedcompanion species. It is a question of cosmopolitics, of learning to be“polite” in responsible relation to always asymmetrical living and dying,and nurturing and killing. And so I end with the alpine tourist brochure’ssevere injunction to the hiker to “be on your best countryside behavior,”or “sorveguate il vostro comportamento,” followed by speciﬁc instructionsabout what polite behavior toward the working dogs and ﬂocks entails.A prosaic detail: The exercise of good manners makes the competent work-ing animalsthose whom the peopleneed to learn to recognize.61The oneswith face were not all human.And say the philosopher responded?42dWHEN SPECIES MEET




This page intentionally left blank 




Mike Peters, Mother Goose and Grimm,copyright 2004Grimmy, Inc. All rights reserved.Reprinted with permission of Grimmy, Inc., in conjunction with the Cartoonist Group.




2. VALUE-ADDED DOGSAND LIVELY CAPITALMarx dissected the commodity form into the doublet of ex -change value and use value. But what happens when the undead butalways generative commodity becomes the living, breathing, rights-endowed, doggish bit of property sleeping on my bed, or giving cheekswabs for your genome project, or getting a computer-readable ID chipinjected under the neck skin before the local dog shelter lets my neigh-bor adopt her new family member? Canis lupus familiaris,indeed; thefamiliar is always where the uncanny lurks. Further, the uncanny is wherevalue becomes ﬂesh again, in spite of all the dematerializations and ob-jectiﬁcations inherent in market valuation.Marx always understood that use and exchange value were namesfor relationships; that was precisely the insight that led beneath the layerof appearances of market equivalences into the messy domain of ex -traction, accumulation, and human exploitation. Turning all the worldinto commodities for exchange is central to the process. Indeed,remaking the world so that new opportunities for commodityproduction and circulation are ever generated is the name of thisgame. This is the game that absorbs living human labor power




without mercy. In Marx’s own colorful, precise language that still givescapitalism’s apologists apoplexy, capital comes into the world “drippingfrom head to toe, from every pore, with blood and dirt.”1What, however, if humanlabor power turns out to be only partof the story of lively capital? Of all philosophers, Marx understood re-lational sensuousness, and he thought deeply about the metabolismbetween human beings and the rest of the world enacted in living labor.As I read him, however, he was ﬁnally unable to escape from the human-ist teleology of that labor—the making of man himself. In the end, nocompanion species, reciprocal inductions, or multispecies epigenetics arein his story.2But what if the commodities of interest to those who livewithin the regime of Lively Capital cannot be understood within thecategories of the natural and the social that Marx came so close to re -working but was ﬁnally unable to do under the goad of human excep-tionalism? These are hardly new questions, but I propose to approachthem through relationships inherent in contemporary U.S. dog–humandoings that raise issues not usually associated with the term biocapital,if,nonetheless, crucial to it.We have no shortage of proof that classic rabid commodiﬁcationis alive and well in consumer-crazy, technoscientiﬁcally exuberant dogworlds in the United States. I will give my readers plenty of reassuringfact-packages on this point, suﬃcient to create all the moral outrage thatwe lefties seem to need for breakfast and all the judgment-resistant desiresthat we cultural analysts seem to enjoy even more. However, if a Marx-equivalent were writing Biocapital,volume , today, insofar as dogs in theUnited States are commodities as well as consumers of commodities, theanalyst would have to examine a tripartite structure: use value, exchangevalue, and encounter value, without the problematic solace of human ex -ceptionalism.3Trans-species encounter value is about relationships amonga motley array of lively beings, in which commerce and consciousness,evolution and bioengineering, and ethics and utilities are all in play. I amespecially interested here in “encounters” that involve, in a nontrivial buthard-to-characterize way, subjectsof diﬀerent biological species. My goalis to make a little headway in characterizing these relationships in thehistorically speciﬁc context of lively capital. I would like to tie my Marx-equivalent into the knots of value for companion species, especially for46dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




dogs and people in capitalist technoculture in the early twenty-ﬁrst cen-tury, in which the insight that to be a situated human being is to beshaped by and with animal familiars might deepen our abilities to under-stand value-added encounters.VALUING DOGS: MARKETS AND COMMODITIESLike a s TV show, companion-animal worlds are all about family.If European and American bourgeois families were among the productsof nineteenth-century capital accumulation, the human–animal compan-ionate family is a key indicator for today’s lively capital practices. Thatnineteenth-century family invented middle-class pet keeping, but what apale shadow of today’s doings that was! Kin and brand are tied in pro-ductive embrace as never before. In , about million U.S. house-holds (percent of all households) had pets, giving homes to about .million dogs, .million cats, .million birds, and many other crit-ters.4As an online report on the pet food and supplies market fromMindBranch, Inc., for stated, “In the past, people may have said theirpet ‘is like a member of the family,’ but during –this attitudehas strengthened, at least in terms of money spent on food with qualityingredients, toys, supplies, services, and healthcare.”5The consumer habitsof families have long been the locus for critical theory’s eﬀorts to under-stand the category formations that shape social beings (such as gender,race, and class). Companion-species kin patterns of consumerism shouldbe a rich place to get at the relations that shape emergent subjects, not allof whom are people, in lively capital’s naturecultures. Properly mutated,the classics, such as gender, race, and class, hardly disappear in this world—far from it; but the most interesting emergent categories of relational-ity are going to have to acquire some new names, and not just for the dogsand cats.The global companion-animal industry is big, and the United Statesis a major player. I know this because I have dogs and cats who live in thestyle in which my whole post-Lassie generation and I have become in-doctrinated. Like any scholar, however, I tried to get some hard ﬁguresto go with the coming examples. The Business Communications Com-pany publishes an annual analysis of market opportunities and segments,VALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd47




company fortunes, rates of expansion or contraction, and other such datadear to the hearts of investors. So for the ﬁrst draft of this chapter I triedto consult The Pet Industry: Accessories, Products, and Servicesfor online. Indeed, I could have downloaded any of the alluring chapters, butall of them are proprietary, and so to peek is to pay. To obtain access tothe whole package would have cost me over ﬁve thousand dollars, a nicepiece of evidence all by itself for my assertion in the ﬁrst sentence of thisparagraph. An alternative data source, Global Information, Inc. (the self-described online “vertical markets research portal”), oﬀers twenty-four-hour, ﬁve-day-per-week updates for pet marketers on forecasts, shares,R&D, sales and marketing, and competitive analysis. Ignore these servicesat your peril.In the end, I settled for training-sized statistical tidbits from Busi-ness Communications and from the free summaries on the Web siteof the American Pet Products Manufacturers Association, Inc.6In theUnited States alone in , pet owners spent about $.billion over-all on companion animals, compared with $billion in (constantdollars). The global ﬁgure for pet food and pet care products for was U.S.$billion, which is an inﬂation-adjusted increase of percentover the period –. The inﬂation-adjusted growth rate for alone was .percent, driven, we are told, by pet owners’ demand for pre-mium foods and supplies.Consider just pet food. ICON Group International published aworld market report in February . The report was written for “strate-gic planners, international executives and import/export managers whoare concerned with the market for dog and cat food for retail sale.” Thepoint was that “with the globalization of the market, managers can nolonger be contented with a local view.” Thus, the report paid special atten-tion to which countries supply dog and cat food for retail sale, what thedollar value of the imports is, how market shares are apportioned coun-try by country, which countries are the biggest buyers, how regional mar-kets are evolving, and so how managers might prioritize their marketingstrategies. Over countries are analyzed, and the report makes clearthat its ﬁgures are estimates of potential that can be drastically altered bysuch things as “‘mad cow’ disease, foot-and-mouth disease, trade embar-goes, labor disputes, military conﬂicts, acts of terrorism, and other events48dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




that will certainly aﬀect the actual trade ﬂows.”7Indeed. Nonetheless, thereport neglected to state the underlying obvious fact: industrial pet foodis a strong link in the multispecies chain of global factory farming.The News York Timesfor Sunday, November , , is my sourcefor the $.billion ﬁgure for the size of the pet food market in theUnited States ($billion in ). I did not know how to think aboutthe size of that sum until I read another New York Timesstory (Decem-ber , ) telling me that in the human cholesterol-lowering statinmarket was worth $.billion to the pharmaceutical industry. How muchhuman blood-lipid control is worth how many dog dinners? I’d throwaway my Lipitor before I shorted my dogs and cats. Marx told us how thepurely objective nature of exchange value obviates the trouble springingfrom such use-value comparisons. He also told us how such things asstatins and premium dog food become historically situated bodily needs.For my taste, he didn’t pay nearly enough attention to whichneedy bodiesin the multispecies web link slaughter labor, chicken cages, pet dinners,human medicine, and much more.I cannot now forget these things as I decide how to evaluate boththe latest niche-marketed dog food purported to maximize the sportsperformance of my agility dog and the diﬀerence between her nutritionalneeds and those of my older but still active pooch. A large and growingportion of pet food products addresses speciﬁc conditions, such as jointand urinary tract health, tartar control, obesity, physiological demands,age-related needs, and so on. I cannot go to an agility meet to run with mydog without tripping over brochures and booths for natural foods, sci-entiﬁcally formulated foods, immune-function enhancing foods, foodscontaining homemade ingredients, foods for doggy vegans, raw organicfoods that would not please vegans at all, freeze-dried carrot-fortiﬁedfoods, food-delivery devices to help out dogs who are alone too much, andon and on. Indeed, diets are like drugs in this nutritional ecology, and cre-ating demand for “treatment” is crucial to market success. Besides diets, Ifeel obligated to investigate and buy all the appropriate supplements thatride the wavering line between foods and drugs (chondroitin sulfate andglucosamine sulfate or omega-fatty acid–rich ﬂaxseed oil, for example).Dogs in capitalist technoculture have acquired the “right to health,” andthe economic (as well as legal) implications are legion.VALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd49




Food is not the whole story. The Business Communications Com-pany stressed the growth occurring in all segments of the companion-animal industry, with rich opportunities for existing players and newentrants. Health is a giant component of this diversifying doggy versionof lively capital. Small-animal veterinarians are well aware of this factas they struggle to incorporate the latest (very expensive) diagnostic andtreatment equipment into a small practice in order to remain competitive.A special study done in revealed that vets’ income was not growingat the rate of comparable professionals, because they did not know howto adjust their fees to the rapidly expanding services they routinely oﬀer.8My family’s credit card records tell me that at least one of the vet practiceswe frequent got the point in spades. In , people in the United Statesspent about $.billion for vet care for pets. As a reality check, I turnedto the “World Animal Health Markets to ,” a report that proﬁlesanimal health markets in ﬁfteen countries, accounting for percent ofthe world share.9The conclusion: in the aﬄuent parts of the globe, the pethealth market is robust and growing.Consider a few ﬁgures and stories. Mary Battiata wrote a feature arti-cle for the Washington Postin August ; it followed her search for adiagnosis for her aging family member, her beloved mutt, Bear, whoshowed troubling neurological symptoms. After the ﬁrst sick visit to the vetcost nine hundred dollars, she began to understand her situation. She wasreferred to Washington, D.C.’s Iams Pet Imaging Center for an MRI. Orrather, Bear was referred, and his guardian–owner, Mary, wrestled with theethical, political, aﬀectional, and economic dilemmas. How does a com-panion animal’s human make judgments about the right time to let her dogdie or, indeed, to kill her dog? How much care is too much? Is the issuequality of life? Money? Pain? Whose? Does paying fourteen hundred dol-lars for an MRI for Bear add to the world’s injustice, or is the comparisonbetween what it costs to run decent public schools or to repair wetlandsand what it costs for Bear’s diagnosis and treatment the wrong compari-son? What about the comparison between people who love their pet kinand can aﬀord an MRI and people who love their pet kin and can’t aﬀordannual vet exams, good training education, and the latest tick and ﬂeaproducts, much less hospice care (now available in a few places for dogs andcats)? What comparisons are the right ones in the regime of lively capital?50dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




Other high-end treatments now available for pets include kidneytransplants, cancer chemotherapy, and titanium joint-replacement sur-geries. The University of California at Davis recently opened an up-to-the-minute treatment and research hospital for companion animals withthe kind of cancer care expected in the best human medical centers. Newveterinary drugs—and human drugs redirected to companion animals—emphasize pain relief and behavior modiﬁcation, matters that hardly ap -peared on the radar screens of Lassie’s people but involve serious moneyand serious ethical dilemmas today. In addition, vets in training todaytake courses in the human–animal bond, and this diversifying region ofthe aﬀectional family economy is as richly commodiﬁed and socially strat-iﬁed as is any other family-making practice, say, for example, assistedreproduction for making human babies and parents.10Pet health insurance has become common, as is malpractice insur-ance for vets, partly fueled by the success of court arguments that com-panion animals cannot be valued as ordinary property. “Replacementvalue” for a companion dog is not the market price of the animal. Neitheris the dog the same as a child nor an aged parent. In case we missed thepoint in all the other aspects of daily life, eﬀorts both to establish moneydamages and to pay the bills for our companions tell us that parent–child,guardian–ward,and owner–propertyare all lousy terms for the sortsof multispecies relationships emerging among us. The categories need amakeover.Besides vets, other sorts of health professionals have also emergedto meet companion-animal needs. I get regular professional adjustmentsfor my Australian shepherd sports partner, Cayenne, from Ziji Scott, ananimal chiropractic-certiﬁed practitioner with magic hands. No one couldconvince me that this practice reﬂects bourgeois decadence at the expenseof my other obligations. Some relationships are zero sum games, and someare not. But a central fact shapes the whole question: rights to health andfamily-making practices are heavily capitalized and stratiﬁed, for dogs aswell as for their humans.Beyond the domains of dog medical services, nutrition, or peda-gogical oﬀerings, canine consumer culture of another sort seems trulybound less. Consider vacation packages, adventure trips, camp experiences,cruises, holiday clothing, toys of all kinds, day care services, designer bedsVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd51




and other animal-adapted furniture, doggy sleeping bags and special tentsand backpacks, and published guides to all of the above. On September, , the New York Timesran ads for dog shopping that featured a$raincoat and $designer collar. Toy dogs as fashion accessoriesto the wealthy and famous are a common newspaper topic and a seriousworry for those who think those dogs have doggish needs.11The Ameri-can Kennel and Boarding Association in reported that the signiﬁ-cant industry growth is in the high-end pet lodgings, such as the newSan Francisco hotel, Wag, which charges eighty-ﬁve dollars per night andoﬀers massage, facials, and swimming pools. Webcam TV for travelinghumans to watch their pets in real time in communal play areas is stan-dard at San Francisco’s middle-of-the-market forty-dollar-a-night FogCity Dogs Lodge.12For those whose commodity preferences are morebookish, look at the companion-animal print culture. Besides a hugecompanion-species book market in categories from anthropology to zool-ogy and the whole alphabet in between, two new general-audience maga-zines make my point. Barkis a Berkeley, California, dog literary, arts, andculture rag that I read avidly, and not just because it favorably reviewedmy Companion Species Manifesto.The East Coast ﬁnally faced its respon-sibilities in this market segment, and so, with articles on such mattersas how to win a dog custody battle and where to ﬁnd the best ten placesto walk with your dog in Manhattan, the New York Dogappeared inNovember–December , aiming to rival Vogueand Cosmopolitanforglossy values.13And all of this hardly touches the media markets crucialto hunting with dogs, playing dog–human sports, working with dogs involunteer search and rescue, and much more. It seems to me that it is alltoo easy in dogland to forget that resistance to human exceptionalismrequiresresistance to humanization of our partners. Furry, market-weary,rights bearers deserve a break.Enough, or rather, almost enough; after all, in lively capital markets“value-added” dogs aren’t just familial co-consumers (or coworkers, forwhich you must go to the next section of this chapter). In the ﬂesh and inthe sign, dogs arecommodities, and commodities of a type central to thehistory of capitalism, especially of technoscientiﬁcally saturated agri busi-ness. Here I will consider only kennel-club registered “purebred” dogs, eventhough those surely aren’t the canines that come ﬁrst to mind in connection52dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




with the term agribusiness,no matter how much pedigree-packing dogsreturn us to crucial nineteenth-century economic and cultural innova-tions rooted in the biosocial body. In Bred for Perfection,Margaret Derryexplains that the public data keeping of lineage (the written, standard-ized, and guaranteed pedigree) is the innovation that fostered interna-tional trade in both livestock such as sheep and cattle and fancy stock suchas show dogs and chickens.14And, I might add, race- and family-makingstock. Institutionally recorded purity of descent, em phasizing both in -breeding and male lines that made female reproductive labor all but invis-ible, was the issue. The state, private corporations, research institutions,and clubs all played their roles in moving practices for controlling animalreproduction from pockets of memory and local endeavors of both elitesand working people to rationalized national and international marketstied to registries. The breeding system that evolved with the data-keepingsystem was called scientiﬁc breeding, and in myriad ways this paper-plus-ﬂesh system is behind the histories of eugenics and genetics, as well asother sciences (and politics) of animal and human reproduction.Dog breeds, not variously diﬀerentiated and stabilized kinds, butbreeds with written pedigrees, were one result. Across continents, dogswith those credentials could command very nice prices as well as fuel amaz-ing practices of heritage invention, standards writing and maintenance,sales contract development, germ plasm trading, health surveillance andactivism, reproductive-technology innovation, and the passionate com-mitment of individuals, groups, and even whole nations.15The proliferation of dog breeds and their movement into everysocial class and geographical region of the world are part of the story.Many breeds have been speciﬁcally produced for the pet market, somequite new, such as the cross of Borzois and long-haired whippets to makethe little sight hound called the silken windhound. Witness today’s ex-plosion in toy breeds and teacup breeds as fashion accessories (and toooften, medical disasters). Or the popularity of the puppy mill–produceddogs because they carry an AKC purebred dog pedigree. Or, as I moveaway from outrage to love aﬀair, I am reminded both of the knowledge-able, talented, self-critical dog people whom I have met in performancedog worlds, as well as in conformation show dog scenes, and of theiraccomplished, beautiful dogs. And of my dogs, including Roland, the oneVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd53




with the fraudulent (that chow chow dad) AKC Australian shepherd reg-istration, acquired so that he can play agility in their sandbox, as long ashe is reproductively sterilized.But is he necessarily reproductively silenced? What happens whenpedigree, or lack of it, meets petri dish? Consider the Dolly technique soinsightfully written about by Sarah Franklin in Dolly Mixtures.Dolly thepedigreed sheep might have been the ﬁrst mammal who was the fruit ofsomatic cell nuclear transfer cloning, but she was at the head of a growingparade of critters. By tracing the many biosocial threads in Dolly’s geneal-ogy across continents, markets, species, sciences, and narratives, Franklinargues that emergent ways of ﬂeshly becoming are at the heart of bio-capital, both as commodities and as modes of production.16Franklinmaintains that breedwealth was the crucial new kind of reproductivewealth in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and control overthe reproduction (or generation by other means) of plants and animals(and, to varying degrees, people) is fundamental to contemporary biocap-ital’s promises and threats. The traﬃc between industrialized agricultureand scientiﬁc medicine for people and animals is especially thick in Dollymixtures and spillovers. Current innovations and controversies in stemcell research and therapeutic as well as reproductive cloning are at theheart of the transnational, transspeciﬁc action.Stem cells and dogs take us inevitably to Hwang Woo-Suk and SeoulNational University. The international scandal surrounding Hwang’san -nouncement in Sciencemagazine in and of achieving theglobalized biomedical grail of human embryonic stem cell clones and thesubsequent revelation in December of fabricated data, bioethics vio-lations in egg donation, and possible embezzlement have a more authen-tic canine backstory that only makes sense in light of Dolly Mixtures.Inthe United States, the well-hyped dog-cloning Missyplicity Project wasdirected to the aﬀectional commodity pet market.17Not so the biomed-ical dog-cloning eﬀorts of Hwang and his nine South Korean associates,plus Gerald Schatten, a stem cell researcher at the University of Pitts-burgh, who announced Snuppy, an Afghan hound puppy cloned with theDolly technique, in August .18Snuppy is a biotechnical splice to hiscore, his name fabricated of S(eoul) N(ational) U(niversity) and (pu)ppy.Hwang’s research career must be understood in the context of agribusiness54dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




animal research moved to human biomedicine. His professorship is in theDepartment of Theriogenology and Biotechnology in the College of Vet-erinary Medicine at Seoul National University. Before Snuppy, Hwangreported a cloned dairy cow in , and he was widely regarded as aworld leader in the ﬁeld. A great deal about Hwang’s dramatic rise andfall is not clear, but what is clear is the thick cross-species travel betweenagribusiness research and human biomedicine often obscured in the U.S.“ethical” debates over human stem cell technologies and imagined thera-pies or reproductive marvels.Pricey U.S. dog cryopreservation services, university–private com-pany collaborations for canine-cloning research geared to the pet market,and Korean national eﬀorts to become ﬁrst in a major area of biomedi-cal research are not the only arias in this lively capital opera. However,even if freezing the cells of my AKC-mutt Roland in anticipation of mak-ing a nuclear clone of him could happen only over the dead bodies of mywhole polyspeciﬁc and polysexual family, these Dolly spillovers, especiallySnuppy, do suggest just the right segue to the next section of “Value-Added Dogs.”VALUING DOGS: TECHNOLOGIES,WORKERS, KNOWLEDGESReferring to advertisements for the sale of working sheepdogs, DonaldMcCaig, the Virginia sheep farmer and astute writer on the history andcurrent state of herding border collies in Britain and the United States,noted that categorically the dogs fall somewhere between livestock andcoworkers for the human shepherds.19These dogs are not pets or familymembers, although they are still commodities. Working dogs are toolsthat are part of the farm’s capital stock, and they are laborers who producesurplus value by giving more than they get in a market-driven economicsystem. I think that is more than an analogy, but it is not an identity.Working dogs produce and they reproduce, and in neither process arethey their own “self-directed” creatures in relation to lively capital, eventhough enlisting their active cooperation (self-direction) is essential totheir productive and reproductive jobs. But they are not human slaves orwage laborers, and it would be a serious mistake to theorize their laborVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd55




within those frameworks. They are paws, not hands. Let’s see if we cansort through the implications of the diﬀerence, even in spite of the evolu-tionary homology of the forelimbs.To do so, I turn to Edmund Russell’s arguments about the evolu-tion ary history of technology in his introduction to the collection Indus-trializing Organisms.20Far from keeping organic beings and artifactualtechnologies separate, putting one in nature and the other in society,Russell adopts recent science and technology studies’ insistence on thecoproduction of natures and cultures and the interpenetration of bodiesand technologies. He deﬁnes organisms shaped for functional perfor -mance in human worlds as biotechnologies—“biological artifacts shapedby humans to serve human ends.”21He goes on to distinguish macro-biotechnologies, such as whole organisms, from microbiotechnologies,such as the cells and molecules that draw all the attention as biotechnol-ogy itself in the current science and business press.In that sense, dogs deliberately selected and enhanced for their work-ing capacities, for example, as herders, are biotechnologies in a system ofmarket farming that became contemporary capital-intensive agribusinessthrough a welter of nonlinear processes and assemblages. Russell is inter-ested in how the ways in which human beings have shaped evolution havechanged both themselves and other species. The tight boxes of nature andsociety do not allow much serious investigation of this question. Russell’smajor eﬀorts are directed at analyzing organisms as technologies, andhe looks at biotechnologies as factories, as workers, and as products.Even though Russell gives almost all the agency to humans—who, I ad -mit readily, make the deliberate plans to change things—I ﬁnd his frame-work rich for thinking about valuing dogs as biotechnologies, workers,and agents of technoscientiﬁc knowledge production in the regime oflively capital.Aside from such critters of the past as spit-turning dogs or cart-hauling dogs, whole dogs are simultaneously biotechnologies and work-ers in several kinds of contemporary material–semiotic reality. Herdingdogs are still at work on proﬁt-making (or, more likely, money-losing)farms and ranches, although job loss has been acute. Their work in sheeptrials is robust but located in the zone between work and sport, as is thelabor of most sled dogs. Livestock guardian dogs have expanding job56dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




opportunities in sheep-raising areas of the French Alps and Pyreneesbecause of the reintroduction of ecotourism-linked heritage predators(wolves, bears, and lynxes), as well as on U.S. ranches no longer allowedto use poisons for predator control. Dogs have state jobs and jobs fran-chised to private providers as airport security laborers, drug and bombsniﬀers, and pigeon-clearing oﬃcers on runways.The popular television show Dogs with Jobs,using the classiﬁedhelp-wanted ads in newspapers as the visual icon for the show, is a goodplace to get a grip on dogs as workers.22Most of the dogs seem to beunpaid voluntary labor, but not all. Jobs include warning of epilepticseizures, detecting cancer, guiding the blind, serving as aides for the hear-ing impaired and the wheelchair-bound and as psychotherapeutic aidesfor traumatized children and adults, visiting the aged, aiding in rescues inextreme environments, and more. Dogs can be and are studied and specif-ically bred to enhance their readiness to learn and perform these kindsof jobs. For all of these jobs, dogs and people have to train together insubject-changing ways. But more of that later.Part dogs (or delegated dog wholes or parts in material bases otherthan carbon, nitrogen, and water) might have more work in lively capitalthan whole dogs. Consider, in addition to Snuppy’s stem cell scene, doggenome projects. Archived canine genomes are repositories useful for re -search in product development by veterinary pharmaceutical enterprisesand human biomedical interests, as well as for research in—a gleam inresearchers’ eyes—behavioral genetics.23This is “normal” biotechnology.Sequencing and databasing the complete dog genome were made a prior-ity of the U.S. National Human Genome Research Institute in June .Based on a poodle, the ﬁrst rough dog genome sequence, about percentcomplete, was published that year. The ﬁrst full draft of the dog genomewas published and deposited in a free public database for biomedical andvet researchers in July . In May , a percent complete sequenceof the genome of a boxer named Tasha, with comparisons to ten otherkinds of dogs, was released. Dogs belonging to researchers, members ofbreed clubs, and colonies at vet schools provided DNA samples. Theteam that produced this draft, in the process developing procedures thatmight speed the deposition of many more mammalian genomes, washeaded by Kerstin Lindblad-Toh, of the Broad Institute of MIT andVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd57




Harvard as well as the Agencourt Bioscience Corporation. Part of theNational Human Genome Research Institute’s Large-Scale SequencingResearch Network, the Broad Institute received a thirty-million-dollargrant for the work. These are the kinds of public–private arrangementstypical of microbiotechnology in the United States and, with variations,internationally.24Further, once the genome was published, the Center for VeterinaryGenetics, at the University of California School of Veterinary Medicine,called for individual dog people and clubs to contribute to a full reposi-tory of many of the diﬀerent breeds of dogs in order to address the needsof diﬀerent domains of dogdom. The goal was to enlarge the DNA databank from its then current sampling of the genetic legacy of one hundredbreeds to more than four hundred international canine populations. Manyresearch projects involving dog genes, organs, diseases, and moleculescould be addressed to canine questions as well as to comparative queriesfor humans. The part dogs are reagents (workers), tools, and products,just as whole dogs are in macrobiotechnological kinds of knowledge andproduction projects.Dogs are valuable workers in technoculture in another sense aswell. In laboratories, they labor as research models both for their ownand for human conditions, especially for diseases that could be “enclosed”for medical commodity production, including for previously unknownsorts of services to address newly articulated needs. That, of course, iswhat their archived genomes are doing, but I want to look more closelyat another mode of this scientiﬁc medical canine labor in the context oflively capital. Stephen Pemberton explores how dogs suﬀering from hemo- philia became model patients, as well as surrogates and technologies forstudying a human disease, over the course of years beginning in the lates in the laboratory of Kenneth Brinkhous at the University of NorthCarolina at Chapel Hill. This research is what made human hemophiliaa manageable disease by the early s with the availability of standard-ized clotting factors.25Bleeder dogs did not just appear at the lab doorstep as ready-mademodels and machine tools for making things for humans. The caninehemophiliac was made through representational strategies, dog care prac-tices, breeding and selection, biochemical characterization, development58dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




of novel measurement devices, and the semiotic and material joining ofhemophilia to other metabolic deﬁciency disorders (especially diabetesand pernicious anemia, both treatable by administering something func-tionally absent in the patient and both diseases in which dogs played alarge role in the research, with crucial payoﬀin techniques and devices forworking with dog organs and tissues). The principal problem Brinkhousfaced in his lab when he brought in male Irish setter puppies who showedthe stigmata of bleeding into joints and body cavities was keeping themalive. The puppies had to become patients if they were to become tech-nologies and models. The entire labor organization of the laboratoryaddressed the priority of treating the dogs before anything else. A bleed-ing dog was given transfusions and supportive care. Lab staﬀcould notfunction as researchers if they did not function as caregivers. Dogs couldnot work as models if they did not work as patients. Thus, the lab becamea clinical microcosm for its research subjects as an essential part of thelast century’s revolution in experimental biomedicine. As Pemberton putit, “We cannot understand how scientists discipline their experimentalorganisms without understanding how these organisms also disciplinescientists, forcing them to care.”26In the late twentieth century, drugs developed for people (and surelytested on rodents) came to be agents of relief for dogs too, in a kind ofpatient-to-patient cross-species transfusion. This kind of dogs-as-patientsscene is part of my own adult origin tale in dogland. My middle-classchildhood tale had more to do with the conﬁning of the multispecies civiccommons through leash laws in the s than with biomedicine. Towardthe end of her sixteenth, and last, year of life in , my half-Lab mutt,Sojourner (that grace-giving whelp of an irresponsible backyard breeder,a dog whom we named for a great human liberator), and I began to fre-quent her vet’s oﬃce in Santa Cruz. I had read Michel Foucault, and Iknew all about biopower and the proliferative powers of biological dis-courses. I knew modern power was productive above all else. I knew howimportant it was to have a body pumped up, petted, and managed by theapparatuses of medicine, psychology, and pedagogy. I knew that modernsubjects had such bodies and that the rich got them before the laboringclasses. I was prepared for a modest extension of my clinical privileges toany sentient being and some insentient ones. I had read Birth of the ClinicVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd59




and The History of Sexuality,and I had written about the technobiopoliticsof cyborgs. I felt I could not be surprised by anything. But I was wrong.Foucault’s own species chauvinism had fooled me into forgetting that dogstoo might live in the domains of technobiopower. The Birth of the Kennelmight be the book I needed to write, I imagined. When Species Meetis themutated spawn of that moment.While Sojourner and I waited to be seen by her vet, a lovely Afghanhound pranced around at the checkout desk while his human discussedrecommended treatments. The dog had a diﬃcult problem—obsessiveself-wounding when his human was oﬀmaking a living, or engaging inless justiﬁable nondog activities, for several hours a day. The aﬄicted doghad a nasty open sore on his hind leg. The vet recommended that the dogtake Prozac. I had read Listening to Prozac;27so I knew this was the drugthat promised, or threatened, to give its recipient a new self in place of thedrab, depressive, obsessive one who had proved so lucrative for the non-pharmaceutical branches of the psychological professions. For years, I hadinsisted that dogs and people were much alike and that other animalshad complex minds and social lives, as well as physiologies and genomeslargely shared with humans. Why did hearing that a pooch should takeProzac warp my sense of reality in the way that makes one see what washidden before? Surely Saul, on the way to Damascus, had more to histurnaround than a Prozac prescription for his neighbor’s ass!The Afghan’s human was as nonplussed as I was. She chose insteadto put a large cone, called an Elizabethan collar, around her dog’s headso that he couldn’t reach his favorite licking spot to suck out his unhap-piness. I was even more shocked by that choice; I fumed internally, Can’tyou get more time to exercise and play with your dog and solve this prob-lem without chemicals or restraints? I remained deaf to the human’sdefensive explanation to the vet that her health policy covered her ownProzac, but the pills were too expensive for her dog. In truth, I was hookedinto the mechanisms of proliferating discourse that Foucault should haveprepared me for. Drugs, restraints, exercise, retraining, altered schedules,searching for improper puppy socialization, scrutinizing the genetic back-ground of the dog for evidence of canine familial obsessions, wonderingabout psychological or physical abuse, ﬁnding an unethical breeder whoturns out inbred dogs without regard to temperament, getting a good toy60dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




that would occupy the dog’s attention when the human was gone, accu-sations about the workaholic and stress-ﬁlled human lives that are out oftune with the more natural dog rhythms of ceaseless demands for humanattention: all these moves and more ﬁlled my neo-enlightened mind.I was on the road to the fully embodied, modern, value-addeddog–human relationship. There could be no end to the search for ways torelieve the psychophysiological suﬀering of dogs and, more, to help themachieve their full canine potential. Furthermore, I am convinced that isactually the ethical obligation of the human who lives with a companionanimal in aﬄuent, so-called ﬁrst-world circumstances. I can no longermake myself feel surprise that a dog might need Prozac and should getit—or its improved, still-on-patent oﬀshoots.Caring for experimental dogs as patients has taken on intensiﬁedmeaning and ambiguities in twenty-ﬁrst-century biopolitics. A leadingcause of death for older dogs and people is cancer. Enabled by compara-tive postgenomics tying humans and dogs together as never before, theNational Cancer Institute set up a consortium of over a dozen veterinaryteaching hospitals in to conduct drug trials on pet dogs living athome, to test for possible beneﬁt in ﬁghting the same malignancies theyshare with humans. A parallel nonproﬁt group will collect tissue samplesand DNA from these pet dogs to pinpoint genes associated with cancerin dogs and people. The companion dogs will be clinic patients and notkenneled lab pooches, possibly relieving some of the latter of their bur-den, and grants and companies will pay for the experimental drugs. Dogsmay beneﬁt from the drugs, but they will get them with lower standardsof safety than required in human testing. That’s the point, after all, forenlisting dogs in National Cancer Institute state-of-the-art testing in theﬁrst place. Pet owners may have to pay for things like biopsies and imag-ing, which can be very expensive. Researchers will not have either theanimal rights scrutiny or the ﬁnancial burden of caring for lab dogs, in -cluding paying for those MRIs.28Pet owners and guardians will have thepower to call a halt to further experimental treatment on the basis of theirsense of their dogs’ experiences. This system of drug testing seems tome superior to the current one, because it places the burden of suﬀering(and opportunity of participating in scientiﬁc research) on those speciﬁcindividuals, humans and dogs, who might reap the beneﬁt of relief. InVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd61




addition, experimentation will take place much more in the open than canever be possible or desirable with lab animals, perhaps encouraging deeperthinking and feeling by a diverse human population of pet owners, as wellas clinicians and scientists.What I ﬁnd troubling here is a growing ethos that subjects pet dogsto the same search for “cures” that human cancer patients endure, ratherthan continuing to work within and improve current standards of care invet practice to reduce cancer burdens and provide supportive care guidedby quality-of-life criteria, not by the goal of maximally prolonging life.Chemotherapy that dogs currently get rarely aims to eliminate the cancer,and dogs consequently generally do not experience the terrible sicknessfrom drug toxicity that most people, in the United States at least, seem tofeel obligated to accept. How long can that moderate veterinary approachto dog illness, and acceptance of death as profoundly sad and hard butalso normal, endure in the face of the power of comparative postgenomicmedicine and its associated aﬀectional and commercial biopolitics?So, dogs have become patients, workers, technologies, and familymembers by their action, if not choice, in very large industries and ex -change systems in lively capital: () pet foods, products, and services;() agribusiness; and () scientiﬁc biomedicine. Dogs’ roles have beenmultifaceted, and they have not been passive raw material to the actionof others. Further, dogs have not been unchangeable animals conﬁned tothe supposedly ahistorical order of nature. Nor have people emerged un-alteredfrom the interactions. Relations are constitutive; dogs and peopleare emergent as historical beings, as subjects and objects to each other,precisely through the verbs of their relating. People and dogs emerge asmutually adapted partners in the naturecultures of lively capital. It is timeto think harder about encounter value.VALUING DOGS: ENCOUNTERSIn considering the value of encounters, why not start with prisons, sincewe have been touring other large industries in lively capital, and this oneis immense? There are many places we might go—dogs terrorizing de -tainees in Iraq, for example, where the encounters that shaped enemies,torturers, and attack dogs made use of the social meanings of all the62dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




“partners” to produce deﬁnite value in lively capital. International humanrights apparatuses (and where were the animal rights outcries on thisone?); franchised interrogation functions; and the moral, psychological,and ﬁnancial economies of contemporary imperialist wars: who coulddeny that all these are at the heart of enterprise and investment? Or wecould travel to the high-security, high-technology, soul-destroying prisonin California’s Pelican Bay to track the attack-dog production, dog-ﬁghting culture, and Aryan gang operations run from the prison, result-ing in the dog-mauling death of a young woman in her apartment hallwayin San Francisco and an outcry for exclusion of dogs from public space ingeneral (but not from apartment hallways).29All of these prison dog–human encounters depend on the face-to-face meeting of living, meaning-generating beings across species; that isthe encounters’ power to terrorize and to reach into the core of all thepartners to produce both dogs condemned to euthanasia when their use-fulness is ended and people ﬁt to carry on the proﬁtable enterprise of theprison–industrial complex, as inmates, lawyers, and guards. However, Iwant to think about coshaping dog–human encounters in another prisoncontext, one that makes me pay a diﬀerent kind of attention to comingface-to-face across species and so to encounter value. Therefore, let’s goto Animal Planet television again, this time to watch Cell Dogs.30If dogsbecame technologies and patients in the world of hemophilia, then theyhave become therapists, companions, students, and inmates in the worldof prison cells. It’s all in the job description.31Animal Planet focuses each week on a diﬀerent prison work projectthat has reforming prisoners teaching reforming pooches their mannersin order to place them in various occupations outside the prison. The nar-rative and visual semiotics are fascinating. First, the entering dogs haveto be made into inmates in need of pedagogy if they are to have produc-tive lives outside. Fast frame cuts have cell doors clanging behind thedogs, each of whom is then assigned to one prisoner–apprentice teacher,to live in the same cell with this individual human inmate for the durationof his or her joint subject-transforming relationship. Dog trainers teachthe prisoners to teach the dogs basic obedience for placement as familymember house pets and sometimes higher-order skills for placement asassistance dogs or therapy dogs. The screen shows the incarcerated dogsVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd63




preparing for life outside by becoming willing, active, achieving obediencesubjects. The pooches are obviously surrogates and models for the pris-oners in the very act of becoming the prisoners’ students and cell mates.The technologies of animal training are crucial to the cell dog pro-grams. These technologies include the postbehaviorist discourses andthe equipment of so-called positive training methods (not unlike many ofthe pedagogies in practice in contemporary schools and child-counselingcenters); some older technologies from the military-style, Koehler train-ing methods based on frank coercion and punishment; and the appara-tuses and bodily and mental habits crucial to making family membersand happy roommates in close quarters. Another sense of technologyis operating here too: in their personal bodies themselves, the dogs andpeople are freedom-making technologies for each other. They are eachother’s machine tools for making other selves. Face-to-face encounter ishow those machines grind souls with new tolerance limits.The canines must be modern subjects in many senses for the celldog program to work. The dogs both require and model nonviolent, non -optional, and ﬁnally self-rewarding discipline from legitimate authority.Both dogs and people model nonviolent, nonoptional, and self-rewardingobedience to an authority that each must earn in relation to the other.That is the route to freedom and work outside—and to survival. Thatdeath awaits the failed dog is a leitmotif in many of the programs, and thelesson for their teachers is not subtle. The traﬃc between performing andmodeling is thick for both the humans and the dogs, who are teachers andstudents, docile bodies and open souls to each other. Life and death arethe stakes in the prison–industrial complex. Prison reform discourse hasnever been more transparent. Arbeit macht frei.Leaving the prison through the mutual self-transformation of dogsand people is the nonstop theme. The humans must stay behind to ﬁnishtheir sentences (some are lifers); nonetheless, when their dogs are suc-cessful canine citizen–workers outside, the human inmates leave jail intwo senses. First, through their dog students, the convicts give themselvesto another human person, to someone free, someone outside, and so theytaste freedom and self-respect both by proxy and in their substantialpres-ence in the ﬂesh of both dog and human being. Second, they demon-strate their own reformed status as obedient, working subjects who can64dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




be trusted with freedom in a society divided into the outside and theinside. Part of the proof of worthiness is the human prisoners’ act of sur-rendering, for the beneﬁt of another, the companion and cell mate withwhom they have lived for weeks or months in the only physically intimate,touching, face-to-face relationship they are allowed. The graduation scenes,which involve the human inmates sacriﬁcing themselves by giving their in -timate companions to another to achieve a better life for both, are alwaysintensely emotional. I dare you to be cynical, even if all the knives of crit-ical discourse are in your hands. Maybe it’s not all “arbeit macht frei” here,but something more like “touch makes possible.” Since I can’t be outsideideology, I’ll take that one, face-to-face and eyes open. The rhetoric thatconnects categories of the oppressed in these programs is not subtle(prisoners, animals, the disabled, women in jail, black men, strays, etc.);all belong to categories that discursively need much more than remedialtraining. However, these projects hold potential for much more promis-ing entanglements that question the terms of these tropes and the condi-tions of those who must live them.Perhaps it would be possible to rethink and retool cell dogs to worktheir magic to build subjects for a world not so ﬁercely divided into out-side and inside. Marx understood the analysis of the commodity forminto exchange value and use value to be a practice crucial to freedom proj-ects. Maybe if we take seriously encounter value as the underanalyzed axisof lively capital and its “biotechnologies in circulation”—in the form ofcommodities, consumers, models, technologies, workers, kin, and knowl-edges—we can see how something more than the reproduction of thesame and its deadly logics-in-the-ﬂesh of exploitation might be going onin what I call “making companions.”In Making Parents: The Ontological Choreography of ReproductiveTechnologies,Charis Thompson compares and contrasts capitalist pro-duction with what she calls a “biomedical mode of reproduction,” which Ithink of as core to the regime of lively capital. Thompson is studying themaking of parents and children through the subject- and object-makingtechnologies of biomedically assisted reproduction, a very lively area ofcontemporary investments of bodily, narratival, desiring, moral, epistemo -logical, institutional, and ﬁnancial kinds. She is acutely alert to the clas-sical processes of production, investment, commodiﬁcation, and so on, inVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd65




contemporary human-assisted reproduction practices in the United States.But she is adamant that the endof the practices makes a diﬀerence; thatis, the whole point is to make parents by making living babies. Capital,volumes –, did not cover that topic. Biocapital,volume , must do so.In two columns, Thompson sets out the following lists, which Iborrow, abbreviate, and abuse:32ProductionReproductionAlienated from one’s laborAlienated from one’s body partsCapital accumulatedCapital promissoryEﬃciency/productivitySuccess/reproductivityLife course ﬁnite and descentLoss of ﬁnitude/linearity in lifelinearcourse and descentEssentialism of natural kinds/socialStrategic naturalization/construction of social kindssociali zation of all kindsIn practice, parents-in-the-making selectively seek out, endure, elaborate,and narrate various objectiﬁcations and commodiﬁcations of their bodyparts. Women do this much more than men do because of the ﬂeshly real-ities of assisted conception and gestation. Many sorts of social stratiﬁca-tion and injustice are in play, but they are often not of the kinds found bythose seeking their ﬁx of outrage whenever they smell the commodiﬁca-tion of humans or part humans. Properly assigned, living babies make liv-ing parents content with their objectiﬁcations. Other actors in this modeof reproduction may be made invisible in order to ensure their status asnonkin and as reproductively impotent. The lure of kin making is thename of this promissory game of reproduction.I am interested in these matters when the kin-making beings are notall human and literal children or parents are not the issue. Companionspecies are the issue. They are the promise, the process, and the product.These matters are mundane, and this chapter has been replete with exam-ples. Add to those many more proliferations of naturalsocial relationali-ties in companion-species worlds linking humans and animals in myriadways in the regime of lively capital. None of this is innocent, bloodless, orunﬁt for serious critical investigation. But none of it can be approached ifthe ﬂeshly historical reality of face-to-face, body-to-body subject makingacross species is denied or forgotten in the humanist doctrine that holds66dVALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL




only humans to be true subjects with real histories. But what does subjector historymean when the rules are changed like this? We do not get very farwith the categories generally used by animal rights discourses, in whichanimals end up permanent dependents (“lesser humans”), utterly natural(“nonhuman”), or exactly the same (“humans in fur suits”).The categories for subjects are part of the problem. I have stressedkin making and family membership but rejected all the names of humankin for these dogs, especially the name “children.” I have stressed dogs asworkers and commodities but rejected the analogies of wage labor, slav-ery, dependent ward, and nonliving property. I have insisted that dogs aremade to be models and technologies, patients and reformers, consumersand breedwealth, but I am needy for ways to specify these matters in non-humanist terms in which speciﬁc diﬀerence is at least as crucial as conti-nuities and similarities across kinds.Biocapital,volume , cannot be written just with dogs and people. Iface up to my disappointment in this sad fact by rejoicing in the workof my fellow animal (and other critter) studies and lively capital analystsacross lifeworlds and disciplines.33Most of all, I am convinced that actualencounters are what make beings; this is the ontological choreographythat tells me about value-added dogs in the lifeworlds of biocapital.VALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITALd67




“McTrap.” Copyright Dan Piraro, 2004. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.




3. SHARING SUFFERINGInstrumental Relations betweenLaboratory Animals and Their PeopleReading Nancy Farmer’s young adult novel A Girl Named Disas-ter,I was arrested by the story of the relationship between an oldAfrican Vapostori man and the guinea pigs he cared for in a little sci-entiﬁc outpost in Zimbabwe around . Used for sleeping sicknessresearch, the lab rodents were at the center of a knot tying togethertsetse ﬂies, trypanosomes, cattle, and people. During their workinghours, the guinea pigs were held in tight little baskets while wire cagesﬁlled with biting ﬂies were placed over them, their skin shaved andpainted with poisons that might sicken the oﬀending insects with theirprotozoan parasites. The ﬂies gorged themselves on the guinea pigs’blood. A young Shona adolescent girl, Nhamo, new to the practices ofscience, watched.“It’s cruel,” agreed Baba Joseph, “but one day the things we learn willkeep our cattle from dying.” He stuck his own arm into a tsetse cage.Nhamo covered her mouth to keep from crying out. The ﬂiessettled all over the old man’s skin and began swelling up. “I do thisto learn what the guinea pigs are suﬀering,” he explained. “It’swicked to cause pain, but if I share it, God may forgive me.”1




Baba Joseph seems to me to oﬀer a deep insight into how to thinkabout the labor of animals and their people in scientiﬁc practices, espe-cially in experimental labs. The experimental animal science inhabited inthis chapter is largely medical and veterinary research in which animalsbear diseases of interest to people. A great deal of animal experimentalscience is not of this type, and for me the most interesting biological re -search, in and out of labs, does not have the human species much in mind.The notion that “the proper study of man is mankind” is risible amongmost of the biologists I know, whose curiosity is actually for and aboutother critters. Curiosity, not just functional beneﬁt, may warrant the riskof “wicked action.” Baba Joseph, however, is worried about sick cattle,coerced guinea pigs, and their people.The animal caretaker is engaged not in the heroics of self-experimentation (a common trope in tropical medicine histories)2but inthe practical and moral obligation to mitigate suﬀering among mortals—and not just human mortals—where possible and to share the conditionsof work, including the suﬀering, of the most vulnerable lab actors. BabaJoseph’s bitten arm is not the fruit of a heroic fantasy of ending all suf-fering or not causing suﬀering, but the result of remaining at risk and insolidarity in instrumental relationships that one does not disavow. Usinga model organism in an experiment is a common necessity in research.The necessity and the justiﬁcations, no matter how strong, do not obviatethe obligations of care and sharing pain. How else could necessity andjustice (justiﬁcation) be evaluated in a mortal world in which acquiringknowledge is never innocent? There are, of course, more standards forevaluation than this one, but forgetting the criterion of sharing pain tolearn what animals’ suﬀering is and what to do about it is not tolerableanymore, if it ever was.SHARING AND RESPONSEIt is important that the “shared conditions of work” in an experimentallab make us understand that entities with fully secured boundaries calledpossessive individuals (imagined as human or animal) are the wrong unitsfor considering what is going on.3That means not that a particular ani-mal does not matter but that mattering is always inside connections that70dSHARING SUFFERING




demand and enable response, not bare calculation or ranking. Response,of course, grows with the capacity to respond, that is, responsibility. Sucha capacity can be shaped only in and for multidirectional relationships, inwhich always more than one responsive entity is in the process of becom-ing. That means that human beings are not uniquely obligated to andgifted with responsibility; animals as workers in labs, animals in all theirworlds, are response-able in the same sense as people are; that is, respon-sibility is a relationship crafted in intra-action through which entities,subjects and objects, come into being.4People and animals in labs areboth subjects and objects to each other in ongoing intra-action. If thisstructure of material–semiotic relating breaks down or is not permittedto be born, then nothing but objectiﬁcation and oppression remains. Theparties in intra-action do not admit of preset taxonomic calculation; re -sponders are themselves co-constituted in the responding and do nothave in advance a proper checklist of properties. Further, the capacity torespond, and so to be responsible, should not be expected to take on sym-metrical shapes and textures for all the parties. Response cannot emergewithin relationships of self-similarity.Calculation, such as a risk–beneﬁt comparison weighted by taxo-nomic rank, suﬃces within relations of bounded self-similarity, such ashumanism and its oﬀspring. Answering to no checklist, response is alwaysriskier than that. If an experimental lab becomes a scene only of calcula-tion in relation to animals or people, that lab should be shut down. Min-imizing cruelty, while necessary, is not enough; responsibility demandsmore than that. I am arguing that instrumental relations of people andanimals are not themselves the root of turning animals (or people) intodead things, into machines whose reactionsare of interest but who haveno presence,no face,that demands recognition, caring, and shared pain.Instrumental intra-action itself is not the enemy; indeed, I will arguebelow that work, use, and instrumentality are intrinsic to bodily webbedmortal earthly being and becoming. Unidirectional relations of use, ruledby practices of calculation and self-sure of hierarchy, are quite anothermatter. Such self-satisﬁed calculation takes heart from the primary dual-ism that parses body one way and mind another. That dualism shouldhave withered long ago in the light of feminist and many other criti-cisms, but the fantastic mind/body binary has proved remarkably resilient.SHARING SUFFERINGd71




Failing, indeed refusing, to come face-to-face with animals, I believe, isone of the reasons.We are in the midst of webbed existences, multiple beings in re-lationship, this animal, this sick child, this village, these herds, theselabs, these neighborhoods in a city, these industries and economies, theseecologies linking natures and cultures without end. This is a ramifyingtapestry of shared being/becoming among critters (including humans)in which living well, ﬂourishing, and being “polite” (political/ethical/inright relation) mean staying inside shared semiotic materiality, includingthe suﬀering inherent in unequal and ontologically multiple instrumentalrelationships. In that sense, experimental animal research is, or can be,necessary, indeed good, but it can never “legitimate” a relation to the suf-fering in purely regulatory or disengaged and unaﬀected ways. The in-teresting question, then, becomes, What might a responsible “sharing ofsuﬀering” look like in historically situated practices?The sense of sharing I am trying to think about is both epistemo-logical and practical.5It’s not about being a surrogate for the surrogate ortaking the place of the suﬀering “other” that we need to consider. We donot need some New Age version of the facile and untrue claim “I feel yourpain.” Sometimes, perhaps, “taking the place of the victim” is a kind ofaction ethically required, but I do not think that is sharing, and, further,those who suﬀer, including animals, are not necessarily victims. Whathappens if we do not regard or treat lab animals as victims, or as otherto the human, or relate to their suﬀering and deaths as sacriﬁce? Whathappens if experimental animals are not mechanical substitutes but sig-niﬁcantly unfree partners, whose diﬀerences and similarities to humanbeings, to one another, and to other organisms are crucial to the workof the lab and, indeed, are partly constructed by the work of the lab?What happens if the working animals are signiﬁcant others with whomwe are in consequential relationship in an irreducible world of embodiedand lived partial diﬀerences, rather than the Other across the gulf fromthe One?In addition, what does “unfree” mean here in relation to animalswho are in an instrumental relation with people? Where is our zoologicalMarx when we need him? Lab animals are not “unfree” in some abstractand transcendental sense. Indeed, they have many degrees of freedom in72dSHARING SUFFERING




a more mundane sense, including the inability of experiments to workif animals and other organisms do not cooperate. I like the metaphor“degrees of freedom”; there really are unﬁlled spaces; something outsidecalculation can still happen. Even factory meat industries have to facethe disaster of chickens’ or pigs’ refusal to live when their cooperation isutterly disregarded in an excess of human engineering arrogance. But thatis a very low standard for thinking about animal freedom in instrumentalrelations.LABOR AND INEQUALITYThe Marx in my soul keeps making me return to the category of labor,including examining the actual practices of extraction of value fromworkers. My suspicion is that we might nurture responsibility with andfor other animals better by plumbing the category of labor more than thecategory of rights, with its inevitable preoccupation with similarity, anal-ogy, calculation, and honorary membership in the expanded abstractionof the Human. Regarding animals as systems of production and as tech-nologies is hardly new.6Taking animals seriously as workers without thecomforts of humanist frameworks for people or animals is perhaps newand might help stem the killing machines.7The posthumanist whisper-ing in my ear reminds me that animals work in labs, but not under con-ditions of their own design, and that Marxist humanism is no more helpfor thinking about this for either people or other animals than otherkinds of humanist formulae. Best of all, the Marxist feminist in my his-tory and community reminds me that freedom cannot be deﬁned as theopposite of necessity if the mindful body in all its thickness is not to bedisavowed, with all the vile consequences of such disavowal for thoseassigned to bodily entrammelment, such as women, the colonized, andthe whole list of “others” who cannot live inside the illusion that freedomcomes only when work and necessity are shuﬄed oﬀonto someone else.Instrumental relations have to be revalued, rethought, lived another way.Marxist feminists, however, were not leaders in coming face to facewith animals; they tended to be all too happy with categories of society,culture, and humanity and all too suspicious of nature, biology, and co-constitutive human relationships with other critters. Marxist feministsSHARING SUFFERINGd73




and their brothers both tended to reserve the category of labor (anddesire and sexuality, if not sex) for people. Other feminists, however, didtake the lead many years ago in seriously cohabiting and understandingthe earth with animals—or, as Val Plumwood called the vast hetero-geneity of presences besides human beings, “earth others.”8These femin-ist theorists paid attention to slimy, furry, scaly, ﬂeshy animals of greatvariety (and other organisms too), not just literary, mythological, philo-sophic, and linguistic ones, although they had a lot to say about those aswell.9I am inside these feminists’ work, nourished and instructed by it,even as I resist the tendency to condemn all relations of instrumentalitybetween animals and people as necessarily involving objectiﬁcation andoppression of a kind similar to the objectiﬁcations and oppressions ofsexism, colonialism, and racism. I think in view of the terrible similarities,too much sway has been given to critique and not enough to seeing whatelse is going on in instrumental human–animal world makings and whatelse is needed.10To be in a relation of use to each other is not the deﬁnition ofunfreedom and violation. Such relations are almost never symmetrical(“equal” or calculable). Rather, relations of use are exactly what compan-ion species are about: the ecologies of signiﬁcant others involve mess-mates at table, with indigestion and without the comfort of teleologicalpurpose from above, below, in front, or behind. This is not some kindof naturalistic reductionism; this is about living responsively as mortalbeings where dying and killing are not optional or able to be launderedlike stolen money by creating unbridgeable gaps in the pathways throughwhich the ﬂows of value can be tracked. Flows of value can be tracked,thanks to Marx and his heirs; but response has to go into trackless terri-tory, without even the orienting signposts of reliable chasms.None of this lets me forget that I called the lab animals unfree insome sense not undone by remembering that relations of utility are notthe source of that ascription. Baba Joseph did not say that understandingthe animals’ suﬀering made the wickedness of causing them pain go away.He said only that his God “may forgive” him. May. When I say “unfree,”I mean that real pain, physical and mental, including a great deal of kill -ing, is often directly caused by the instrumental apparatus, and the painis not borne symmetrically. Neither canthe suﬀering and dying be borne74dSHARING SUFFERING




symmetrically, in most cases, no matter how hard the people work torespond. To me that does not mean people cannot ever engage in experi-mental animal lab practices, including causing pain and killing. It doesmean that these practices should never leave their practitioners in moralcomfort, sure of their righteousness. Neither does the category of “guilty”apply, even though with Baba Joseph I am convinced the word wickedremains apt.11The moral sensibility needed here is ruthlessly mundaneand will not be stilled by calculations about ends and means. The neededmorality, in my view, is culturing a radical ability to remember and feelwhat is going on and performing the epistemological, emotional, and tech- nical work to respond practically in the face of the permanent complexitynot resolved by taxonomic hierarchies and with no humanist philosoph-ical or religious guarantees. Degrees of freedom, indeed; the open is notcomfortable.NONMIMETIC SHARINGBaba Joseph did not stand in for the guinea pigs; rather, he tried to under-stand their pain in the most literal way. There is an element of mimesis inhis actions that I aﬃrm: feeling in his ﬂesh what the guinea pigs in hischarge feel.12I am most interested, however, in another aspect of BabaJoseph’s practice, an element I will call nonmimetic sharing. He sustainedbites not to stand in as experimental object but to understand the rodents’pain so as to do what he could about it, even if that was only to serve aswitness to the need for something properly called forgiveness even in themost thoroughly justiﬁed instances of causing suﬀering. He did not re -sign his job (and so starve? or “just” lose his status in his community?) ortry to convince Nhamo not to help out in the lab with Dr. van Heerden.He did not “free” the guinea pigs or worry about the ﬂies. Joseph encour-aged and instructed Nhamo’s curiosity about and with animals of all sorts,in and out of the lab. Still, Joseph had his God from whom he hoped forforgiveness. What might standing in need of forgiveness mean when Godis not addressed and sacriﬁce is not practiced? My suspicion is that the kindof forgiveness that we fellow mortals living with other animals hope for isthe mundane grace to eschew separation, self-certainty, and innocenceeven in our most creditable practices that enforce unequal vulnerability.SHARING SUFFERINGd75




In an essay called “FemaleMan© _Meets_OncoMouse™,” I con-fronted a genetically engineered lab critter, patented under the nameOncoMouse, whose work was to serve as a breast cancer model forwomen. Commanded by her suﬀering and moved by Lynn Randolph’spainting The Passion of OncoMouse,which showed a chimeric mouse withthe breasts of a white woman and a crown of thorns in a multinationalobservation chamber that was a laboratory, I argued: “OncoMouse™ is mysibling, and more properly, male or female, s/he is my sister. . . . Althoughher promise is decidedly secular, s/he is a ﬁgure in the sense developedwithin Christian realism: s/he is our scapegoat; s/he bears our suﬀering;s/he signiﬁes and enacts our mortality in a powerful, historically speciﬁcway that promises a culturally privileged kind of secular salvation—a‘cure for cancer.’ Whether I agree to her existence and use or not, s/hesuﬀers, physically, repeatedly, and profoundly, that I and my sisters mightlive. In the experimental way of life, s/he is the experiment. . . . If notin my own body, surely in those of my friends, I will someday owe toOncoMouse™ or her subsequently designed rodent kin a large debt. So,who is s/he?”13It is tempting to see my sister OncoMouse as a sacriﬁce,and certainly the barely secular Christian theater of the suﬀering servantin science and the everyday lab idiom of sacriﬁcing experimental animalsinvite that thinking. OncoMouse is deﬁnitely a model substituted forhuman experimental bodies. But something the biologist Barbara Smutscalls copresence with animals is what keeps me from resting easily withthe idiom of sacriﬁce.14The animals in the labs, including the oncomice,have face; they are somebody as well as something, just as we humans areboth subject and object all the time. To be in response to that is to recog-nize copresence in relations of use and therefore to remember that nobalance sheet of beneﬁt and cost will suﬃce. I may (or may not) have goodreasons to kill, or to make, oncomice, but I do not have the majesty ofReason and the solace of Sacriﬁce. I do not have suﬃcient reason,only therisk of doing something wicked because it may also be good in the con-text of mundane reasons.Further, those mundane reasons are inextricablyaﬀective and cognitive if they are worth their salt. Felt reason is not suf-ﬁcient reason, but it is what we mortals have. The grace of felt reason isthat it is always open to reconsideration with care.I am trying to think about what is required of people who use other76dSHARING SUFFERING




animals unequally (in experiments, directly or indirectly, in daily living,knowing, and eating because of animals’ sensuous labor). Some instru-mental relations should be ended, some should be nurtured, but none ofthis without response, that is, nonmechanical and morally alert conse-quences for all the parties, human and not, in the relation of unequal use.I don’t think we will ever have a general principle for what sharing suﬀer-ing means, but it has to be material, practical, and consequential, the sortof engagement that keeps the inequality from becoming commonsensicalor taken as obviously okay. The inequality is in the precise and changeablelabor practices of the lab, not in some transcendent excellence of theHuman over the Animal, which can then be killed without the charge ofmurder being brought. Neither the pure light of sacriﬁce nor the nightvision of the power of domination illuminates the relationships involved.Inequality in the lab is, in short, not of a humanist kind, whetherreligious or secular, but of a relentlessly historical and contingent kindthat never stills the murmur of nonteleological and nonhierarchical mul-tiplicity that the world is. The questions that then interest me are, Howcan the multispecies labor practices of the lab be less deadly, less painful,and freer for all the workers? How can responsibility be practiced amongearthlings? Labor as such, which is always proper to instrumental rela-tions, is not the problem; it is the always pressing question of nonsym-metrical suﬀering and death. And nonmimetic well-being.KILLINGJacques Derrida has been lurking in this reﬂection for quite some time,and it is time to invite him in directly. Not least, Derrida eloquently andrelentlessly reminds his readers that responsibility is never calculable.There is no formula for response; precisely, to respond is not merely toreact with a ﬁxed calculus proper to machines, logic, and—most Westernphilosophy has insisted—animals. In the lineage of Western philosopherswith and against whom Derrida struggled all his life, only the Human canrespond; animals react. The Animal is forever positioned on the otherside of an unbridgeable gap, a gap that reassures the Human of his ex-cellence by the very ontological impoverishment of a lifeworld that can-not be its own end or know its own condition. Following Lévinas on theSHARING SUFFERINGd77




subjectivity of the hostage, Derrida remembers that in this gap lies thelogic of sacriﬁce, within which there is no responsibility toward the livingworld other than the human.15Within the logic of sacriﬁce, only human beings can be murdered.Humans can and must respond to one another and maybe avoid deliber-ate cruelty to other living beings, when it is convenient, in order to avoiddamaging their own humanity, which is Kant’s scandalous best eﬀort onthe topic, or at best recognize that other animals feel pain even if theycannot respond or in their own right obligate response. Every living beingexcept Man can be killed but not murdered. To make Man merely kill-able is the height of moral outrage; indeed, it is the deﬁnition of geno-cide. Reaction is for and toward the unfree; response is for and towardthe open.16Everything but Man lives in the realm of reaction and so cal-culation; so much animal pain, so much human good, add it up, kill somany animals, call it sacriﬁce. Do the same for people, and they lose theirhumanity. A great deal of history demonstrates how all this works; justcheck out the latest list of genocides-in-progress. Or read the rolls ofdeath rows in U.S. prisons.Derrida understood that this structure, this logic of sacriﬁce andthis exclusive possession of the capacity for response, is what producesthe Animal, and he called that production criminal, a crime against beingswe call animals. “The confusion of all nonhuman living creatures withinthe general and common category of the animal is not simply a sin againstrigorous thinking, vigilance, lucidity, or empirical authority; it is also acrime. Not against animality precisely, but a crime of the ﬁrst orderagainst the animals, against animals.”17Such criminality takes on specialhistorical force in view of the immense, systematized violence againstanimals that deserves the name “exterminism.” As Derrida put it, “No onecan deny this event any more, no one can deny the unprecedentedpropor-tions of the subjection of the animal. . . . Everybody knows what terrify-ing and intolerable pictures a realist painting could give to the industrial,mechanical, chemical, hormonal, and genetic violence to which man hasbeen submitting animal life for the past two centuries.”18Everyone mayknow, but there is not nearly enough indigestion.19Within the logic of sacriﬁce that undergrids all versions of religiousor secular humanism, animals are sacriﬁced precisely because they can be78dSHARING SUFFERING




killed and then ingested symbolically and materially in acts saved fromcannibalism or murder of the brother by the logic of surrogacy and sub-stitution. (Derrida understood that patricide and fratricide are the onlyreal murders in the logic of humanism; everybody else to whom the lawis applied is covered by courtesy.) The substitute, the scapegoat, is notMan but Animal.20Sacriﬁce works; there is a whole world of those whocan be killed, because ﬁnally they are only something, not somebody, closeenough to “being” in order to be a model, substitute, suﬃciently self-similar and so nourishing food, but not close enough to compel response.Not the Same, but Diﬀerent; not One, but Other. Derrida repudiatesthis trap with all the considerable technical power of deconstruction andall the moral sensitivity of a man who is aﬀected by shared mortality.Judging that the crime that posits the Animal is more than idiotic (abêtise), Derrida goes much further: “The gesture seems to me to consti-tute philosophy as such, the philosopheme itself.”21Derrida argues that the problem is not human beings’ denyingsomething to other critters—whether that be language, or knowledge ofdeath, or whatever is the theoretico-empirical sign of the Big Gap popu-lar at the moment—but rather the death-defying arrogance of ascribingsuch wondrous positivities to the Human. “The question of the said ani-mal in its entirety comes down to knowing not whether the animal speaksbut whether one can know what respondmeans. And how to distinguisha response from a reaction.”22Taking as given the irreducible multiplic-ity of living beings, Homo sapiensand other species, who are entangledtogether, I suggest that this question of discernment pivots on the unre-solved dilemmas of killing and relationships of use.I am afraid to start writing what I have been thinking about all this,because I will get it wrong—emotionally, intellectually, and morally—and the issue is consequential. Haltingly, I will try. I suggest that it is amisstep to separate the world’s beings into those who may be killed andthose who may not and a misstep to pretend to live outside killing. Thesame kind of mistake saw freedom only in the absence of labor and neces-sity, that is, the mistake of forgetting the ecologies of all mortal beings,who live in and through the use of one another’s bodies. This is not say-ing that nature is red in tooth and claw and so anything goes. The natu-ralistic fallacy is the mirror-image misstep to transcendental humanism.SHARING SUFFERINGd79




I think what my people and I need to let go of if we are to learn to stopexterminism and genocide, through either direct participation or indirectbeneﬁt and acquiescence, is the command “Thou shalt not kill.” The prob-lem is not ﬁguring out to whom such a command applies so that “other”killing can go on as usual and reach unprecedented historical proportions.The problem is to learn to live responsibly within the multiplicitousnecessity and labor of killing, so as to be in the open, in quest of thecapacity to respond in relentless historical, nonteleological, multispeciescontingency. Perhaps the commandment should read, “Thou shalt notmake killable.”The problem is actually to understand that human beings do notget a pass on the necessity of killing signiﬁcant others, who are them-selves responding, not just reacting. In the idiom of labor, animals areworking subjects, not just worked objects. Try as we might to distanceourselves, there is no way of living that is not also a way of someone, notjust something, else dying diﬀerentially. Vegans come as close as anyone,and their work to avoid eating or wearing any animal products wouldconsign most domestic animals to the status of curated heritage collec-tions or to just plain extermination as kinds and as individuals. I do notdisagree that vegetarianism, veganism, and opposition to sentient animalexperimentation can be powerful feminist positions; I do disagree thatthey are Feminist Doxa. Further, I think feminism outside the logic ofsacriﬁce has to ﬁgure out how to honor the entangled labor of humansand animals together in science and in many other domains, includinganimal husbandry right up to the table. It is not killing that gets us intoexterminism, but making beings killable. Baba Joseph understood thatthe guinea pigs were not killable; he had the obligation to respond.I think that is exactly what David Lurie, the sexually harassing,middle-aged scholar of poetry, understood in J. M. Coetzee’s Disgrace.Working with a vet who fulﬁlled her duty to untold numbers of stray andsick animals by killing them in her clinic, Lurie brought the dog he hadbonded with to her for euthanasia at the end of the novel. He could havedelayed the death of that one dog. That one dog mattered. He did notsacriﬁce that dog; he took responsibility for killing without, maybe forthe ﬁrst time in his life, leaving. He did not take comfort in a language ofhumane killing; he was, at the end, more honest and capable of love than80dSHARING SUFFERING




that. That incalculable moral response is what, for me, distinguishes DavidLurie in Disgracefrom Elizabeth Costello in The Lives of Animals,forwhom actually existing animals do not seem present. Elizabeth Costello,the ﬁctional Tanner Lecturer in Coetzee’s Lives of Animals,inhabits a rad-ical language of animal rights. Armed with a ﬁerce commitment to sover-eign reason, she ﬂinches at none of this discourse’s universal claims, andshe embraces all of its power to name extreme atrocity. She practices theenlightenment method of comparative history in order to ﬁx the awfulequality of slaughter. Meat eating is like the Holocaust; meat eating isthe Holocaust. What would Elizabeth Costello do if she were in the placeof Bev Shaw, the volunteer animal caretaker in Disgrace,whose daily ser-vice of love is to escort large numbers of abandoned dogs and cats to thesolace of death? Maybe there is no solace for those animals, but onlydying. What would Costello do in the place ofDisgrace’s Lucy Lurie,whose face-to-face life with dogs and human neighbors in postapartheidSouth Africa arrests the categorical power of words in midutterance?Or even of David Lurie, Lucy’s disgraced father, who ﬁnally inhabits adiscourse of desire at least as ﬁerce and authentic as Elizabeth Costello’sdistinction-obliterating discourse of universal suﬀering? How do therelentlessly face-to-face, historically situated, language-defeating suﬀer-ing and moral dilemmas of Disgracemeet the searingly generic, category-sated moral demands of The Lives of Animals?And who lives and whodies—animals and humans—in the very diﬀerent ways of inheriting thehistories of atrocity that Coetzee proposes in these novels’ practices ofmoral inquiry?23I suggest that what follows from the feminist insight that embracedhistorically situated, mindful bodies as the site not just of ﬁrst (maternal)birth but also of full life and all its projects, failed and achieved, is thathuman beings must learn to kill responsibly. And to be killed responsibly,yearning for the capacity to respond and to recognize response, always withreasons but knowing there will never be suﬃcient reason. We can neverdo without technique, without calculation, without reasons, but thesepractices will never take us into that kind of open where multispeciesresponsibility is at stake. For that open, we will not cease to require a for-giveness we cannot exact. I do not think we can nurture living until weget better at facing killing. But also get better at dying instead of killing.SHARING SUFFERINGd81




Sometimes a “cure” for whatever kills us is just not enough reason to keepthe killing machines going at the scale to which we (who?) have becomeaccustomed.CARINGIt is always bracing to go back to the lab after a visit with great philoso-phers and the awful places one gets into because of them. Let me revisitthe hemophilic canines in “Value-Added Dogs and Lively Capital” (chap-ter ). There we saw how dogs suﬀering from hemophilia became modelpatients, as well as surrogates and technologies for studying a human dis-ease, over the course of years beginning in the late s in the laboratoryof Kenneth Brinkhous at the University of North Carolina at ChapelHill.24To share the dogs’ suﬀering, or that of participants in today’s ex -periments, would be not to mimic what the canines go through in a kindof heroic maso chistic fantasy but to do the workof paying attention andmaking sure that the suﬀering is minimal, necessary, and consequential.If any of those assurances are found impossible, which is always a riskyjudgment made on the basis of reasons but without the guarantee of Rea-son, then the responsible work is to bring the enterprise to a halt. Break-ing the sacriﬁcial logic that parses who is killable and who isn’t might justlead to a lot more change than the practices of analogy, rights extension,denunciation, and prohibition. Examples could include making sure exper-iments are well planned and executed; taking the time to practice careamong and for all the people and organisms in the lab and in the worldsreached by that lab, even if results come more slowly or cost more orcareers aren’t as smooth; and practicing the civic skills of political engage-ment and cultural presence in these sorts of issues, including the skills ofresponding, not reacting, to the discourse of those who do not grant thegoodness or necessity of one’s scientiﬁc practices. None of this makes theword wickedgo away; I am not advocating cleaning the soul by hygienicreformism. I am advocating the understanding that earthly heterogene -ous beings are in this web together for all time, and no one gets to be Man.If the plant molecular biologist Martha Crouch was right that someof the pleasures of lab science that tend to make practitioners less able toengage in full cosmopolitics come from a Peter Pan–like preadolescence,82dSHARING SUFFERING




in which one never really has to engage the full semiotic materiality ofone’s scientiﬁc practices,25then maybe sharing suﬀering is about grow-ing up to do the kind of time-consuming, expensive, hard work, as well asplay, of staying with all the complexities for all of the actors, even know-ing that will never be fully possible, fully calculable. Staying with thecomplexities does not mean not acting, not doing research, not engagingin some, indeed many, unequal instrumental relationships; it does meanlearning to live and think in practical opening to shared pain and mortal-ity and learning what that living and thinking teach.The sense of cosmopolitics I draw from is Isabelle Stengers’s. Sheinvoked Deleuze’s idiot, the one who knew how to slow things down, tostop the rush to consensus or to a new dogmatism or to denunciation,in order to open up the chance of a common world. Stengers insists wecannot denounce the world in the name of an ideal world. Idiots knowthat. For Stengers, the cosmos is the possible unknown constructed bymultiple, diverse entities. Full of the promise of articulations that diversebeings might eventually make, the cosmos is the opposite of a place oftranscendent peace. Stengers’s cosmopolitical proposal, in the spirit offeminist communitarian anarchism and the idiom of Whitehead’s philos-ophy, is that decisions must take place somehow in the presence of thosewho will bear their consequences. Making that “somehow” concrete is thework of practicing artful combinations. Stengers is a chemist by training,and artful combinations are her métier. To get “in the presence of” de -mands work, speculative invention, and ontological risks. No one knowshow to do that in advance of coming together in composition.26For those hemophilic dogs in the mid-twentieth century, their phys-iological labor demanded from human lab people the answering labor ofcaring for the dogs as patients in minute detail before addressing ques-tions to them as experimental subjects. Of course, the research wouldhave failed otherwise, but that was not the whole story—or should not beallowed to be the whole story when the consequences of sharing suﬀeringnonmimetically become clearer. For example, what sorts of lab arrange-ments would minimize the number of dogs needed? Make the dogs’ livesas full as possible? Engage them as mindful bodies, in relationships ofresponse? How to get the funding for a biobehavioral specialist as part ofthe lab staﬀfor training both lab animals and people on all levels, fromSHARING SUFFERINGd83




principal investigators to animal room workers?27How to involve humanswith hemophilia or humans who care for people with hemophilia in thecare of the dogs? How to ask in actual practice, without knowing theanswer through a calculus of how much and whose pain matters, whetherthese sorts of experiments deserve to ﬂourish anymore at all? If not, whosesuﬀering then will require the practical labor of nonmimetic sharing? Allof this is my own imagined scenario, of course, but I am trying to picturewhat sharing could look like if it were built into any decision to useanother sentient being where unequal power and beneﬁt are (or shouldbe) undeniable and not innocent or transparent.The Belgian philosopher and psychologist Vinciane Despret arguedthat “articulating bodies to other bodies” is always a political matter. Thesame must be said about disarticulating bodies to rearticulate other bod-ies. Despret reformulated ways for thinking about domestication betweenpeople and animals.28My study inhabits one of the major sites wheredomestic animals and their people meet: the experimental laboratory. Ihave made side trips into the agricultural animal pen and abattoir, pro-pelled by the cattle in Baba Joseph’s story, beasts loved and cultivated in -tensely by Nhamo and her people, beasts used cruelly by the tsetse ﬂiesand their trypanosomes, and beasts turned into eﬃcient, healthy enough,parasite-free, meat-making machines in the death camps of industrialagribusiness. The language of nonmimetic sharing and work is not goingto be adequate, I am sure, even if it is part of a needed toolkit. When ourhumanist or religious soporiﬁcs no longer satisfy us, we require a richarray of ways to make vivid and practical the material–ethical–political–epistemological necessities that must be lived and developed inside un -equal, instrumental relations linking human and nonhuman animals inresearch as well as in other sorts of activities. Human beings’ learningto share other animals’ pain nonmimetically is, in my view, an ethical obli-gation, a practical problem, and an ontological opening. Sharing painpromises disclosure, promises becoming. The capacity to respond may yetbe recognized and nourished on this earth.I end in the company of another arresting writer, Hélène Cixous,who remembers how she failed her childhood dog with abject betrayal.Many years later, she knew only that she loved him, knew only how to lovehim, recognized only how he loved. Bitten hard on the foot by her crazed84dSHARING SUFFERING




dog, Fips, who had been brought to the insanity of the bite by the dailypelting of rocks into the family’s compound in Algiers after World WarII, the twelve-year-old Cixous, subject like all her family to the insup-portable pain of the death of her father and the repudiation visited on thescapegoat outsiders by the colonized Arabs all around them, could notface the awful fate of her dog. No complexity of lived history saved herfamily from the label of doubly hated French Jews. The Cixous family, likethe colonized Arabs, were made categorically killable. No grace of a happyending saved Fips from the consequences. The leashed dog, apparentlyexpecting the girl Hélène to step on him, savaged her foot, holding ondespite her desperate beating to make him let go; after this, Cixous couldno longer face Fips. The dog, ill and neglected, died in the company ofher brother; Hélène was not there. As an adult, Cixous learned to tell thestory of Job the Dog.The story ends in tragedy. . . . I wanted him to love me like this andnot that. . . . But if they told me I wanted a slave I would haveresponded indignantly that I only wanted the pure ideal dog I hadheard of. He loved me as an animal and far from my ideal. . . . I havehis rage painted on my left foot and on my hands. . . . I did not makelight in his obscurity. I did not murmur to him the words that allanimals understand. . . . But he had ticks, big as chickpeas. . . . Theyate him alive, those blood drinking inventions created to kill a victimentirely lacking in possibilities to escape them, those proofs of theexistence of the devil soft vampires that laugh at the dog’s lack ofhands, they suckle it to death, Fips feels his life ﬂow into their tribeof stomachs and without the chance of combat. . . . I did notaccompany him. A foul fear of seeing the one I did not love strongenough die, and as I would not give my life for him, I could no longershare his death.29My story ends where it began, with the dilemmas posed by blood-sucking insects, when the logic of sacriﬁce makes no sense and thehope for forgiveness depends on learning a love that escapes calculationbut requires the invention of speculative thought and the practice of re-membering, of rearticulating bodies to bodies. Not an ideal love, not anobedient love, but one that might even recognize the noncompliant mul-tiplicity of insects. And the taste of blood.SHARING SUFFERINGd85




CODA: REARTICULATINGI wrote “Sharing Suﬀering” acutely conscious that a few weeks later Iwas to give a keynote address at the conference Kindred Spirits, at whichmost of the speakers and attendees would be vegans, animal activists, andother thoughtful people, including some biologists, suspicious of mostanimal lab research.30I did not plan to give this paper there, but if I wasgoing to be able to say anything in good faith at that conference, I neededto write publicly on the hard issues in response to and with that commu-nity. Talking about conducting responsive ﬁeld research or training withdogs and horses, while serious and important, would not fulﬁll my obli-gation to people or animals. I am a part of the Kindred Spirits humanand non-human animal community in many of the same ways in whichI have been part of the ecofeminist world, in response to whom I wrotethe “Cyborg Manifesto” in . I also was and am part of the experi-mental biological science community to whom that cyborg paper wasequally addressed.My friend and colleague Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi read “SharingSuﬀering” in manuscript and forced me to come face-to-face with, as sheput it, “the hardest case for the theory of co-presence and response”:It’s much easier to make use of a notion of trans-species relationalityin ﬁeld studies where the scientist/knower can hang out in theanimal’s habitat. But the harder question is when the site is whollyhumanly-constructed, where the lab is a total environment. In thelab, not only is the relationship unequal and asymmetrical; it iswholly framed and justiﬁed, legitimated, and meaningful within therationalist materials of early modern humanism. Why? Because it isconditioned on the human ability to capture, breed, manipulate, andcompel animals to live, behave, die within its apparatus. How has itbeen justiﬁed? By human power over the animal. Justiﬁed in the pastby divine right and hierarchy of domination, or by human reason’sgloss on necessary human predation over other beings.So if you were going to abandon humanism, in favor of thepost-humanism, ahumanism, non-humanism of the processphilosophers, of the phenomenologists, of Derrida and Whitehead,I still want to know how speciﬁcally laboratory experimental practicesget done and get justiﬁed. These details, these mundane practices, arethe place where the politics of successor science get worked out.86dSHARING SUFFERING




What I’m trying to say is, Donna, the hardest case of all will bestruggled over in the actual details of prohibition and license and thedetails of practice in the procedures in the lab during experiments.I want to know what you would say when someone buttonholesyou and says: I challenge you to defend the slaughter of lab animals inbiomedical experiments. No matter how carefully you guard them fromextraordinary pain, in the end, they are subject to pain inﬂicted by youfor the social goods of: knowledge-seeking in itself, or applications forhuman purposes. You did it. You killed the animals. Defend yourself.What do you say then?31I wrote her back:Yes, all the calculations still apply; yes, I will defend animal killing forreasons and in detailed material–semiotic conditions that I judgetolerable because of a greater good calculation. And no, that is neverenough. I refuse the choice of “inviolable animal rights” versus “humangood is more important.” Both of those proceed as if calculation solvedthe dilemma, and all I or we have to do is choose. I have neverregarded that as enough in abortion politics either. Because we didnot learn how to shape the public discourse well enough, in legal andpopular battles feminists have had little choice but to use the languageof rationalist choice as if that settled ourprolife politics, but it doesnot and we know it. In Susan Harding’s terms, we feminists whoprotect access to abortion, we who kill that way, need to learn torevoice life and death in our terms and not accept the rationalistdichotomy that rules most ethical dispute.32Calculation also demands another series of questions, ones femi-nists struggling with abortion decisions know intimately too: for whom,for what,and by whomshould a cost–beneﬁt calculation be made, sincemore than one always entangled being is at stake and in play in all of thesehard cases? When I questioned the biologist Marc Bekoﬀin a panel ses-sion at the Kindred Spirits conference, he stated uncategorically that hismake-or-break question is, “Does the research beneﬁt the animals?” Inlight of the history of the reduction of lab animals to machine tools andproducts for big pharma (the technoscientiﬁc pharmaceutical research–industrial complex), agribusiness, cosmetics, art performances, and muchelse, that question has particular force. Notasking that question seriouslyis, or ought to be, outside the pale of scientiﬁc practice.SHARING SUFFERINGd87




The practice of holding nonhuman animals at the center of atten-tion is necessary but not suﬃcient, not just because other moral and on -tological goods compete in that kind of cost–beneﬁt frame, but moreimportant because companion-species worldliness works otherwise. Aquestion like Bekoff’s is not a moral absolute but a needed, mortal, focus-ing practice in a soul-numbing, situated history. That practice does notreduce the force of the question but locates it on earth, in real places, wherejudgment and action are at stake. Further, individual animals, human andnonhuman, are themselves entangled assemblages of relatings knotted atmany scales and times with other assemblages, organic and not. Individ-uated critters matter; they are mortal and ﬂeshly knottings, not ultimateunits of being. Kinds matter; they are also mortal and ﬂeshly knottings,not typological units of being. Individuals and kinds at whatever scale oftime and space are not autopoietic wholes; they are sticky dynamic open-ings and closures in ﬁnite, mortal, world-making, ontological play.Ways of living and dying matter: Which historically situated prac-tices of multispecies living and dying should ﬂourish? There is no outsidefrom which to answer that mandatory question; we must give the bestanswers we come to know how to articulate, and take action, without thegod trick of self-certainty. Companion-species worlds are turtles all theway down. Far from reducing everything to a soup of post- (or pre-) mod-ern complexity in which anything ends up permitted, companion-speciesapproaches mustactually engage in cosmopolitics, articulating bodies tosome bodies and not others, nourishing some worlds and not others, andbearing the mortal consequences. Respect is respecere—looking back,holding in regard, understanding that meeting the look of the other is acondition of having face oneself. All of this is what I am calling “sharingsuﬀering.” It is not a game but more like what Charis Thompson callsontological choreography.33I act; I do not hide my calculations that motivate the action. I amnot thereby quit of my debts, and it’s more than just debts. I am not quitof response-ability, which demands calculations but is not ﬁnished whenthe best cost–beneﬁt analysis of the day is done and not ﬁnished whenthe best animal welfare regulations are followed to the letter. Calcula-tions—reasons—are obligatory and radically insuﬃcient for companion-species worldliness. The space opened up by words like forgiveand wicked88dSHARING SUFFERING




remains, although I grant that overripe religious tones cling to those wordslike a bad smell, and so we need other words too. We have reasons but notsuﬃcient reasons. To refuse to engage the practices for getting good rea-sons (in this case, for doing particular experimental lab science) is not juststupid but also criminal. Neither “the greater human good trumps animalpain” camp nor the “sentient animals are always ends in themselves andso cannot be used that way” camp sees that the claim to have SuﬃcientReasons is a dangerous fantasy rooted in the dualisms and misplaced con-cretenesses of religious and secular humanism.Obviously, trying to ﬁgure out who falls below the radar of sen-tience and so is killable while we build retirement homes for apes is alsoan embarrassing caricature of what must be done. We damn well do havethe obligation to make those lab apes’ lives as full as we can (raise taxes tocover the cost!) and to take them out of the situations into which we haveinexcusably placed them. Improved comparative biobehavioral sciences,in and out of labs, as well as aﬀective political and ethical reﬂection andaction, tell us that no conditions are good enough to continue permittingmany kinds of experiments and practices of captivity for many animals,not only apes. Note, I think we now know this, at least in serious part,becauseof research. But again, those calculations—necessary, obligatory,and grounding action out loud and in public—are not suﬃcient.Now, how to address that response-ability (which is always experi-enced in the company of signiﬁcant others, in this case, the animals)? Asyou say, Sharon, the issue lies not in Principles and Ethical Universalsbut in practices and imaginative politics of the sort that rearticulates therelations of minds and bodies, in this case critters and their lab peopleand scientiﬁc apparatuses. For example, what about instituting changesin daily lab schedules so that even rats or mice get to learn how to do newthings that make their lives more interesting. (A trainer to enhance thelives of subjects is a little thing but a consequential one.) After all, in theworld of biotechnology, rodents bear the brunt of increased invasive useworldwide.34Besides the provision of good human child care attached tolabs, I’d love to see many jobs open up for good animal trainers and envi-ronmental enrichment practitioners. I imagine the lab people having topass a positive-methods training proﬁciency test and lab-oriented bio-behavioral ecology test for the species they work with in order to keepSHARING SUFFERINGd89




their jobs or obtain approval for their research. Experimenters would haveto pass such tests for the same reasons that bosses and workers these dayshave to learn that sexual harassment is real (even if the regulatory appa-ratus often seems to be a caricature of what feminists intended); that is,unless retrained, people, like other animals, keep seeing and doing whatthey already know how to see and do, and that’s not good enough.Of course, imagining that reforms will settle the matter is a fail-ure of aﬀective and eﬀective thinking and a denial of responsibility. Newopenings will appear because of changes in practices, and the open is aboutresponse. I think this actually happens all the time with good experi-menters and their critters. For most of this chapter, I have concentratedon instrumental, unequal, scientiﬁc relations among human and nonhu-man vertebrates with sizable brains that people identify as being like theirown in critical ways. However, the vast majority of animals are not likethat; nonmimetic caring and signiﬁcant otherness are my lures for tryingto think and feel more adequately; and multispecies ﬂourishing requiresa robust nonanthropomorphic sensibility that is accountable to irreduci -ble diﬀerences.In a doctoral exam committee with my colleague, marine inverte-brate zoologist Vicki Pearse, I learned how she looks for ways to make hercup corals in the lab more comfortable by ﬁguring out which wave lengthsand periods of light they enjoy. Getting good data matters to her, and sodo happy animals, that is, actual animalwell-being in the lab.35Inspiredby Pearse, I asked some of my biologist friends who work with inverte-brates to tell me stories about their practices of care that are central totheir labor as scientists. I wrote:Do you have an example from your own practice or those closeto you of how the well being of the animals, always important forgood data, of course, but not only for that, matters in the daily life ofthe lab? I want to argue that such care is not instead of experimentsthat might also involve killing and/or pain, but is intrinsic to thecomplex felt responsibility (and mundane non-anthropomorphickinship) many researchers have for their animals. How do you makeyour animals happy in the lab (and vice versa)? How do goodzoologists learn to see when animals are not ﬂourishing? Theinteresting stories are in the details more than the grand principles!90dSHARING SUFFERING




Michael Hadﬁeld, professor of zoology at the University of Hawaiiand director of the Kewalo Marine Laboratory (the Paciﬁc BiosciencesResearch Center), responded:What your questions draw to mind for me lies more in my work withthe Hawaiian tree snails than our small beasts at the marine lab. Ihave worked very hard to provide laboratory environments for theseendangered snails that approach a ﬁeld setting as closely as possible.To that end, we buy expensive “environmental chambers,” wherein wecan set up day lengths and temperature–humidity regimes thatapproach those of the snails’ ﬁeld habitats as much as possible. Wealso try to provide a leafy world and the mold they scrape fromleaves in abundance. Most importantly, we provide all of this in apredator-free world, to “save” them from the aliens [highly destructiveintroduced species such as predatory snails and rats] that are eatingthem up in the mountains. I also ﬁnd the snails to be beautiful andtheir babies to be “cute,” but that’s not very scientiﬁc, is it? For manyreasons—not least being their legally protected status—we work veryhard to keep from injuring or killing any of the snails in the lab. I trulywant to see these species persist in the world, and what we do in thelab is the only way I know to make that happen, at present. We arenow caring for more than ,tree snails in the lab, at great expenseand personal eﬀort, with the goal of staving oﬀeven more extinctionsthan have already occurred. A major part of this is keeping the snailsas healthy and “natural” as possible (“natural,” because they mustsomeday go back to—and survive in—the ﬁeld). If that’s “keepingthem happy,” then it’s our driving force.How do we see (assuming we are “good zoologists”) that ouranimals are not ﬂourishing? Ah, well, usually it’s when they die. Snailsand worms don’t emit cries of anguish, nor typically show signs ofillness for very long before they die. For the tree snails, I watch thedemographic trends in each terrarium very carefully (we census themat least bi-weekly) to note whether there are births, if death rates aregreater than birth rates, etc. At the ﬁrst hint of something wrong, Iforce the lab crew to immediately stop and review every step in themaintenance-culture regime. We often have to check an entireenvironmental chamber (+ diﬀerent terraria, with several species)to see if something is wrong with the entire environment. And we takeimmediate steps to remedy situations, even when we don’t fullyunderstand them. E.g., I recently concluded that my lab group wasover-ﬁlling the terraria with leafy branches from ohi’a trees at eachcleaning/changing session. They had concluded that, since the snails’SHARING SUFFERINGd91




food is the mold growing on the leaves, the more leaves the better. Iexplained that the snails needed more air ﬂow through the terraria,and that their activities were strongly regulated by light, little of whichreached the centers of the leaf-crammed terraria. So, we’ve ﬁxed thatand are now looking for the next problem and “remedy.”36Scott Gilbert, whose work I have drawn from constantly over manyyears, also gave me a story rooted in his experimental investigation, withhis Swarthmore undergrad students, of the embryonic origin of the tur-tle plastron from neural crest cells:I usually don’t allow my students to kill any animals. That’s alwaysbeen one of my jobs. I don’t particularly mind dissecting turtleembryos oﬀtheir yolks and consigning them to percentparaformaldehyde. I’d probably tolerate a day of that more than I’dtolerate dispatching one adult or hatchling turtle. I don’t know ofany story as provocative as the one you mentioned concerning theman who had his arm bitten by tsetse ﬂies. The founder of thisdepartment, Joseph Leidy, was a remarkable person, and one legendis that he walked from Philadelphia to Swarthmore because he hadforgotten to ask a student to feed the frogs and lizards.37I like the language of “politics” as used by Despret, Latour, andStengers, which I see related to polisand polite:good manners (politesse),response to and with. Hadﬁeld, Gilbert, and Pearse are “polite”; theirsis the biological cosmopolitical practice of articulating bodies to otherbodies with care so that signiﬁcant others might ﬂourish. Their work isimmersed in the daily minutiae of life and death for the animals (andthe students and postdocs) they care for and learn with and from. I amsuspicious of assimilating this labor to the category of “bioethics,” but Iam not ready to give over the word ethicsto the enemy either. It’s myold refusal to give up what folks say I can’t have, such as cyborg.I don’tduck the decision to kill animals for the best reasons that persuade me orduck what it takes to formulate those best reasons. I am just saying thatdoes not end the question; it opens it up. Maybe that’s all nonhumanismmeans. But in that little “all” lies permanent refusal of innocence and self-satisfaction with one’s reasons and the invitation to speculate, imagine,feel, build something better. This is the sf worlding that has always luredme. It is a real worlding.92dSHARING SUFFERING




Indeed, Whitehead in Stengers’s hands talks of abstractions as lureswhen our previous abstractions break down.38Loving our abstractionsseems to me really important; understanding that they break down evenas we lovingly craft them is part of response-ability. Abstractions, whichrequire our best calculations, mathematics, reasons, are built in order tobe able to break down so that richer and more responsive invention, spec-ulation, and proposing—worlding—can go on. A Whiteheadian proposi -tion, says Stengers, is a risk, an opening to what is not yet. A propositionis also an opening to become with those with whom we are not yet. Putthat into the dilemma ensuing from killing experimental organisms ormeat animals, and the mandatory “ethical” or “political” call is to reimag-ine, to speculate again, to remain open, because we are (reasonably, if webuilt good abstractions; badly, if we were lazy, unskillful, or dishonest)killing someone, not just something.We are face-to-face, in the company of signiﬁcant others, compan-ion species to one another. That is not romantic or idealist but mundaneand consequential in the little things that make lives. Instead of being ﬁn-ished when we say this experimental science is good, including the kindthat kills animals when necessary and according to the highest standardswe collectively know how to bring into play, our debt is just opening upto speculative and so possible material, aﬀective, practical reworlding inthe concrete and detailed situation of here,in this tradition of research,not everywhere all the time. This “here” might be quite big, even global, ifabstractions are really well built and full of grappling hooks for connec-tions. Maybe sf worlding—speculative ﬁction and speculative fact—is thelanguage I need instead of forgivenessand wickedness.Maybe even BabaJoseph and Cixous would think so, if probably not the ticks and tsetseﬂies. Perhaps best of all, in the lab and in the ﬁeld, Hawaiian tree snailsmight actually have a chance to live naturally because an experimentalinvertebrate zoologist cared in nonanthropomorphic, nonmimetic, pain -staking detail.SHARING SUFFERINGd93




This page intentionally left blank 




4. EXAMINED LIVESPractices of Love and Knowledgein Purebred DoglandCURIOSITY AND THE LOVE OF KINDSI need to ask again: Whom and what do I touch when I touch mydogs? How is “becoming with” a practice of “becoming worldly”?What do these questions mean when the entangled knots of com-panion species join kindsof dogs with their collectively organizedpeopleas ﬁercely as individual dogs interlace with particular humans? Kindsof companion species come in many ﬂavors, but in this chapter, I needto break bread with a particularly contaminated and controversial kindof kind—an institutionalized “purebred” dog breed, in particular, Aus-tral ian shepherds in the United States. Right from the start, my typolog-ical convention has taken a position in the fray, because I cannot bringmyself to write about kinds of dogs as thedog, theAustralian Shep-herd, the only sort to get capital letters in the idiom of purebred dog-land and elsewhere, while all nominative plurals are lowercased ascollectives (Australian shepherds) or given scare quotes around callnames for mere individual dogs, as in “Cayenne” rather thanCayenne, while I am unmarked Donna, empowered by honorarymembership in the category Man to live textually outside




scare quotes. Little privileges tell big stories. Typological errors suggest re -visions. Respecere.In the beginning of everything that led to this book, I was pure ofheart, at least in relation to dog breeds. I knew they were an aﬀectation,an abuse, an abomination, the embodiment of animalizing racist eugen-ics, everything that represents modern people’s misuse of other sentientbeings for their own instrumental ends. Besides, so-called purebreds gotsick all the time, as well they should from all that genetic manipulation.Really bad, in short. Mutts were good as long as they were sterilized;trained to a low standard—lest human control play too big a role—bypositive methods; and oﬀleash in every possible situation. Fertile streetand village dogs were good because they lived in the third world or itsmoral and symbolic equivalent in doggish humanism, but they neededto be rescued nonetheless. At home, in my progressive, American middle-class, white bubble, I was a true believer in the Church of the Shelter Dog,that ideal victim and scapegoat and therefore the uniquely proper recipi-ent of love, care, and population control. Without giving anyone quarterabout our collective and personal obligations to mutts and shelter dogs,I have become an apostate. I am promiscuously tied with both my oldand new objects of aﬀection, two kinds of kinds, mutts and purebreds.Two terrible things caused this unregenerate state: I got curious, and I fellin love. Even worse, I fell in love with kinds as well as with individuals.Parasitized by paraphilias and epistemophilias, I labor on.1Research can be calming in such circumstances. Tantalized by ques-tions about kinds of dogs, and especially by questions about the peopleand the dogs involved in health and genetics activism inside biotechno-logical natureculture, I was told to talk to a woman in Fresno, California,named C. A. Sharp, who, I was assured, was the diva of dog genetic healthin Australian shepherd land. All of that ﬁt nicely into my alibi as a sciencestudies scholar and look-alike anthropologist. It helped that, temptedto excess by the modest success of my Aussie–chow cross mutt, Roland,in the sport of agility—an activity that my husband, Rusten, and I inno-cently began with our politically correct, rehomed, adult pooch to helphim socialize and gain conﬁdence with other dogs—I was also told thatSharp, a lady into a herding breed, albeit the conformation end of things,might be able to help me ﬁnd a great agility prospect, a.k.a., a high-drive,96dEXAMINED LIVES




purpose-bred, puppy athlete. My informants were right; C.A. was all thisand more. Not only did she direct me to the stock dog breeders who helpedbring Cayenne into the world; in Sharp and I began a research ex -change and friendship in dogland that tied new companion-species knotsin my heart and mind. In “Examined Lives” I will track Sharp’s practicesof curiosity and care over several decades to tease out how becomingworldly can work when kinds are at stake.First, however, I need to tell how that material–semiotic kind calledAustralian shepherds came to be in the world at all. Knowing and livingwith these dogs means inheriting all of the conditions of their possibility,all of what makes relating with these beings actual, all of the prehen-sions that constitute us as companion species. To be in love means tobe worldly, to be in connection with signiﬁcant otherness and signifyingothers, on many scales, in layers of locals and globals, in ramifying webs.I want to know how to live with the histories I am coming to know. Onceone has been in touch, obligations and possibilities for response change.BREED STORIES: AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERDSIf anything is certain about Australian shepherd origins, it is that no oneknows how the name came about, and no one knows all of the kinds ofdogs tied into the ancestry of these talented herders. Perhaps the surestthing is that the dogs should be called the United States western ranchdog. Not “American,” but “United States.” Let me explain why that mat-ters, especially since most (but far from all) of the ancestors are probablyvarieties of collie types that emigrated with their people from the BritishIsles to the East Coast of North America from early colonial times on. TheCalifornia gold rush and the aftermath of the Civil War are the keys to myregional national story. These epic events made vast swathes of the NorthAmerican West into part of the United States. I don’t want to inheritthese violent histories, as Cayenne, Roland, and I run our agility coursesand conduct our cross-species family aﬀairs. But, like it or not, ﬂesh-to-ﬂesh and face-to-face, I have inherited these histories through touch withmy dogs, and my obligations in the world are diﬀerent because of thatfact. That’s why I have to tell these stories—to tease out the personal andcollective response required now, not centuries ago. Companion speciesEXAMINED LIVESd97




cannot aﬀord evolutionary, personal, or historical amnesia. Amnesia willcorrupt sign and ﬂesh and make love petty. If I tell the story of the goldrush and the Civil War, then maybe I can also remember the other storiesabout the dogs and their people—stories about immigration, indigenousworlds, work, hope, love, play, and the possibility of cohabitation throughreconsidering sovereignty and ecological developmental naturecultures.Romantic-origin stories about Aussies tell of late nineteenth- andearly twentieth-century Basque herders bringing their little blue merledogs with them in steerage as they headed for the ranches of Californiaand Nevada to tend the sheep of a timeless pastoral West after a sojournof herding sheep in Australia. “In steerage” gives the game away; working-class men in steerage were in no position to bring their dogs to Australiaor to California. Besides, the Basques who immigrated to Australia didnot become herders; they became sugarcane workers; and they did not goto that frontier called Down Under until the twentieth century. Not nec-essarily shepherds before, the Basques came to California, sometimes viaSouth America and Mexico, in the nineteenth century with the millionslusting for gold, and ended up herding sheep to feed other disappointedminers. The Basques also established popular restaurants, heavy on lambdishes, in Nevada on what became the interstate highway system afterWorld War II. The Basques acquired their sheep dogs from among localworking herding dogs, who were a mixed lot, to say the least.2Spanish missions favored the coercion of sheep ranching to “civi-lize” the Indians, but in her online history of Australian shepherds, LindaRorem notes that by the s the number of sheep in the far West hadgreatly declined (not to mention human reductions from the killing anddislocation of Native peoples), and the pastoral economy was depressed.3The mission sheep were descendants of the Iberian Churra, which theSpanish valued for hardiness, fecundity, and adaptability. Originally accom- panying the conquistadors for food and ﬁber, the Churra (called Churroby Anglos and later by Native Americans too) were the mainstay of NewSpain’s ranches and villages by the seventeenth century. Acquiring thesesheep for themselves through both raids and trade, other Native Ameri-can peoples bred them for over three hundred years for adaptation torugged native pastoral conditions. The Churro became the famous Puebloand Navajo sheep, whose wool was spun and woven into the Southwest98dEXAMINED LIVES




Indians’ exquisite textiles. In Navajo communities, sheep are primarilyowned by women, and weaving has always been women’s labor. Further,hopeful projects to reintegrate twenty-ﬁrst-century Navajo young peopleinto the community by splicing the so-called modern and traditional relyon a reinvigorated, cosmopolitan Navajo–Churro sheep culture. Genderand generation grow with the ﬁbers of a lamb’s coat and muscle.In the s, thousands of Churro were herded into the West tosupply the people of the gold rush. The U.S. Army slaughtered most of theNavajo ﬂocks in the s in retribution for Indian resistance to conquestand relocation to Bosque Redondo, and “improved” European sheep breedsand stock reductions were forced on the Navajo throughout the earlydecades of the twentieth century. In the s, in response to drought,U.S. federal government agents went hogan-to-hogan to shoot mandatedpercentages of sheep. In front of their human households, the agents killedevery Navajo–Churro sheep they found under the mistaken belief thatthese tough-looking animals were especially worthless. In both experien-tial and scientiﬁc fact, Navajo–Churro ovines need less grass and water,thrive on less human labor, produce a higher-quality wool ﬁber and ameat of higher protein and less fat content than “progressive” Europeanbreeds in comparable naturalcultural conditions. Even in the early twenty-ﬁrst-century, Navajo elders can narrate the details of each sheep shot. Fewsurvived, and in the s, there were only around of this hardy kindof sheep in Diné Bikéyah, also known as the Navaho Nation. In the ﬁrstdecade of the s, the kind of sheep, the people committed to them, andthe traditional–modern ways of life that these companion species knittogether seem to have a chance for a multispecies future in technoculturalagropastoralism and its many-threaded coalitions and freedom projects.My California historian colleagues tell me they ﬁnd very little men-tion of herding dogs associated with Spanish missionization and Indianlabor. However, at some point the Navajo did enlist the work of dogs fortheir sheep, mostly for protection from predators who surely came fromthe same motley of dogs in the West, both English and Iberian in lineageand imaginably even some preconquest dogs,4who contributed to Aus-tralian shepherds. Never standardized into a closed breed and alwaysopen to the contributions of whatever dogs proved useful to the Navajo,these hardy, diverse dogs still labor today for the Diné, protecting theirEXAMINED LIVESd99




miraculously still-surviving but endangered Navajo–Churro sheep, as wellas their “im proved” sheep ﬂocks. Restoration and preservation projectsinvolving the Navajo–Churro sheep breed are now part of the biopoliticsof the West and Southwest, including online and local niche-marketingof their meat and ﬁber, festivals crucial both to indigenous communitybuilding and to transregional tourism, rare-sheep breeding labs, writtenovine breed standards and genetic databases (for example, the Navajo–Churro genetic material collections of the National Center for GeneticResources Preservation [NCGRP] in Fort Collins, Colorado), Hispanoand Navajo cultural–political action and educational projects, guard lla-mas favored over working livestock guardian dogs, spay–neuter projectsfor surplus Navajo Nation dogs, and range restoration work. Started inby Lyle McNeal, an Anglo animal scientist working with the NavajoNation, the Navajo Sheep Project aimed “to establish a breeding Navajo–Churro ﬂock, from which livestock is returned to Navajo and Hispanicweavers and sheep raisers. Recognizing the intimate relationship betweensheep, wool, weaving, land, and traditional cultures, the project seeks tosupport agro-pastoralism and create culturally-relevant economic supportfor the continuation of these cultures.”5In , the Diné bí’ íína’ (NavajoLifeways) registered as a nonproﬁt organization in Arizona. “Diné bí’ íína’represents the Navajo Nation Sheep and Goat Producers, providing lead-ership, technical information, and economic development assistance to in-dividuals and families and supporting traditional lifeways associated withsheep, wool, and goat producing. The organization seeks to restore statusto sheep herding and to promote the education that is necessary for itspursuit in the modern world.”6This story tells me again that following the dogs (and their herbi-vores) cannot help but make their human traveling companions moreworldly, more enmeshed in webs of history that demand response today.In my view, response should include, but not be limited to, supportingagroecological ranching; opposing factory-system meat and ﬁber produc-tion; working for genetic diversity and ecological restoration for manydomestic and wild species; joining with indigenous economic and politicalstruggles over land and biowealth; becoming smarter about the complexbiopolitics of human class, nation, and ethnicity that are entangled withkinds as well as with institutionalized breeds of nonhuman animals; and,100dEXAMINED LIVES




hardly least, taking personal and collective action for the animals’ well-being in their relations with diverse contemporary people. Alerted by thatminimal checklist for response, I return to the branch of the story that ledto Australian shepherds and some of the responses enmeshed in tellingthe tale.Discovery of gold radically and permanently changed the food econ-omy, species assemblages, politics, human and more-than-human demog -ra phies, and naturalsocial ecology of California and other parts of theNorth American West.7Large sheep ﬂocks were transported by sailingthem from the east coast around Cape Horn, driving them overland fromthe Midwest and New Mexico, and shipping them from that other whitesettler colony with a strong market-oriented pastoral economy, Austra -lia.8What the gold rush began, the aftermath of the Civil War ﬁnished,with the military reduction and containment of western Native Ameri-cans; consolidations of land expropriated from Mexicans, Californios, andIndians; and the vast inﬂux of Anglo (and signiﬁcant numbers of alwaysparenthetical African American) settlers.All of these movements of sheep also meant movements of theirherding dogs. These were not the guardian dogs of the old transhumantEurasian pastoral ecologies and economies, with their established marketroutes, seasonal pasturages, and local bears and wolves (who were, none -theless, heavily depleted, especially where progress held sway). The whitesettler colonies in Australia and the United States adopted an even moreaggressive attitude than their European forebears to nonhuman preda-tors, building fences around most of Queensland to keep out dingoes andtrapping, poisoning, and shooting anything with serious canine teeth thatmoved on the land in the U.S. West.9Guardian breeds, such as GreatPyrenees and Akbash dogs, did not appear in the U.S. western sheepeconomy until after these eradication tactics became illegal in the queertimes of eﬀective environmental movements from the s onward,when collaboration with the slightly mad white women of purebred live-stock guardian dog land began to seem rational to at least some manlyranchers of both genders. But that is another story, more wolﬁsh in natureand consequences.The herding dogs accompanying the immigrant sheep from both theU.S. East Coast and Australia were mainly of the old working collie orEXAMINED LIVESd101




shepherd types. These were strong, multipurpose dogs with a “loose eye”and upstanding working posture—rather than with a sheep trial–selected,border collie hard eye and crouch—from which several kennel-club breedsderive. Among the dogs coming to the U.S. West from Australia werethe frequently merle-colored “German coulies,” who look a lot like modernAustralian shepherds. These were British-derived, all-purpose herding “col-lies,” called German because German settlers lived in an area of Australiawhere these dogs were common. Dogs that look like contemporary Aussiesmight have acquired their name early from association with ﬂocks arriv-ing on boats from Down Under, whether or not they, too, came on thoseships. Or, associated with later immigrant dogs, these types might haveacquired the name “Australian shepherd” as late as World War I. Writtenrecords are scarce. And there wasn’t a “purebred” in sight for a long time.Identiﬁable lines, however, were developing in California, Washing-ton, Oregon, Colorado, and Arizona by the s. The Australian Shep-herd Club of America met for the ﬁrst time in in Himmel Park,Arizona, and comprising about twenty people, the new parent club askedthe National Stock Dog Registry to handle the breed. Registration wasnot common until the mid- to late s.10The range of types was stillwide, and styles of dogs were associated with particular families andranches. Curiously, a rodeo performer from Idaho named Jay Sisler ispart of the story of molding a kind of dog into a contemporary breed,complete with its clubs and politics. He began training two smart pups,Shorty and Stub, in on an Idaho ranch, and he subsequently workedwith several other Aussies and with a high-jumping greyhound. For overtwenty years, Sisler’s “blue dogs” performed for his popular rodeo trickshow.11Although many of his dogs are behind Australian shepherd pedi-grees, he was proud of never owning a registered dog. He knew the par-ents of most of these dogs, but that is as deep as genealogy went in thebeginning. Sisler obtained his dogs from various ranchers, several of whoseAussies became foundation stock of the breed. Among the identiﬁed,dogs out of ,ancestors in my Cayenne’s ten-generation pedi-gree, I count seven Sisler dogs in her family. (Many with names such as“Redding Ranch Dog” and “Blue Dog,” ,out of over million ances-tors are known in her twenty-generation tree; that leaves a few gaps. Mostof the really early Aussies were never registered.)102dEXAMINED LIVES




An accomplished trainer of the type Vicki Hearne would haveloved,12Sisler considered Keno, whom he acquired around , to be hisﬁrst really good dog. Keno contributed oﬀspring to what became thebreed, but the Sisler dog who made the biggest impact (percentage ances-try) to the current population of Aussies was John, a dog with unknownantecedents who wandered one day onto the Sisler ranch and into writ-ten pedigrees. There are many such stories of foundation dogs. Theycould all be microcosms for thinking about companion species and theinvention of tradition in the ﬂesh as well as in the text.The Aussie parent club, ASCA, wrote a preliminary standard inand a ﬁrm one in and got its own breed club registry goingin . Organized in , the ASCA Stock Dog Committee organizedherding trials and titles, and working ranch dogs began their considerablereeducation for the trial ring.13Conformation competitions and otherevents became popular, and sizable numbers of Aussie people saw AKCEXAMINED LIVESd103

Jay Sisler and some ofhis rodeo performingcanine partners.




aﬃliation as the next step. Other Aussie people saw AKC recognition asthe road to perdition for any working breed. The pro-AKC people brokeaway to found their own club, the United States Australian ShepherdAssociation (USASA), which was given full AKC recognition in .All of the biosocial apparatus of modern breeds emerged, includingsavvy lay health and genetics activists; scientists researching gene-linkedillnesses common in the breed and establishing companies to marketresultant vet biomedical products; scientists and entrepreneurs engagedin comparative genomics, postgenomics, and stem cell research hinged onthe published complete DNA sequences of a growing array of taxonomicspecies as well as of entities such as distinct breeds of dogs; Aussie-themed small businesses; performers passionate about the dogs in agility,ﬂyball, obedience, and dancing; both suburban weekend and rural ranch-ing stock dog trialers; search and rescue workers, both dogs and humans;therapy dogs and their people; termite-detection businesses employingAussies as sniﬀer dogs; breeders committed to maintaining the versatileand diverse herding dogs they inherited; other breeders enamored of big-coated, gorgeous show dogs with untested herding talent; puppy millers104dEXAMINED LIVES

Beret’s Dogon Grit winning High in Sheep at the 2002Australian Shepherd Club ofAmerica National Stock Dog Finals in Bakersfield, California. Courtesy of Glo Photo andGayle Oxford.




cashing in on a popular breed no matter the suﬀering of their reproduc-ing dog “stock” or their oﬀspring; abundant backyard breeders despised byall of the above but self-justiﬁed by the fantasy (and sometimes reality) oftheir children witnessing the “miracle of birth” just once; and much more.Cayenne’s breeders, Gayle and Shannon Oxford in California’s Cen-tral Valley, are active in both the USASA and ASCA. Committed tobreeding and training working stock dogs and also showing in confor-mation and agility, the Oxfords taught me about “the versatile Aussie,” adiscourse that I see as analogous to the Great Pyrenees people’s “dualpurpose” or “whole dog.” These idioms work to prevent the splitting up ofbreeds into ever more isolated gene pools, each dedicated to a specialist’slimited goal, whether that be sports, beauty, or something else. The bed -rock test of an Australian shepherd, however, remains the ability to herdwith consummate skill. If “versatility” does not start there, the workingbreed will not survive.That fact concentrates my question about how to inherit the historyof touch with these dogs and so how to shape becoming with them in apotentially less violent future. The working dogs are the means and oﬀ-spring of colonial conquest, the international meat and ﬁber animal trade,U.S. western ranch economies and ecologies, Native American resistanceto the U.S. Army, and sports and entertainment cultures. The nonwork-ing dogs are the oﬀspring of class, race, and gender formations that arerooted in the conformation show world and aﬀectional pet culture.14Fur-ther, no one can live with a herding (or hunting) dog seriously and remainabove the debates about their working partners, the domestic and wildmeat- and ﬁber-producing herbivores. Living in response to these histo-ries is not about guilt and its resultant exterminationist nonsolutions, suchas shutting down all stock ranching, encouraging only vegan diets, andworking against the deliberate breeding of herding, pet, and show dogs.I believe that ethical veganism, for example, enacts a necessarytruth, as well as bears crucial witness to the extremity of the brutality inour “normal” relations with other animals.15However, I also am also con-vinced that multispecies coﬂourishing requires simultaneous, contradic-tory truths if we take seriously notthe command that grounds humanexceptionalism, “Thou shalt not kill,” but rather the command that makesus face nurturing and killing as an inescapable part of mortal companionEXAMINED LIVESd105




species entanglements, namely, “Thou shalt not make killable.” There isno category that makes killing innocent; there is no category or strategythat removes one from killing. Killing sentient animals is killing someone,not something; knowing this is not the end but the beginning of seriousaccountability inside worldly complexities. Facing up to the outrage ofhuman exceptionalism will, in my view, require severely reducing humandemands on the more-than-human world and also radically reducing thenumber of human beings (notby murder, genocide, racism, war, neglect,disease, and starvation—all means that the daily news shows to be com-mon as sand grains on the beach).Facing up to the outrage of human exceptionalism also requiresworking for the mortal entanglements of human beings and other organ-isms in ways that one judges, without guarantees, to be good, that is, todeserve a future. From the point of view of situated histories in the UnitedStates, I have proposed modern agropastoralism connected to indigenousas well as other struggles, and also embedded in technoculture, as some-thing I ﬁnd good, that is, requiring response, feeling, and work. Except asmuseum, rescue, or novelty heritage critters, most kinds (and individuals)of domestic animals and their ways of living and dying with people woulddisappear unless this hard matter is approached without moral absolutes.I ﬁnd that disappearance to be as unacceptable as human murder, geno-cide, racism, and war. Moral absolutes contribute to what I mean by ex -terminism. Faced with hard origin stories and irreducible entanglement,we should not go postal, wiping out the source of our well-earned dis-ease, but instead deepen responsibility to get on together without thedream of past, present, or future peace.That is part of what the philosopher Isabelle Stengers means bycosmopolitics. Forbidding both the dream (and nightmare) of a ﬁnal solu- tion and also the fantasy of transparent and innocent communication,cosmopolitics is a practice for going on, for remaining exposed to conse-quences, for entangling materially with as many of the messy players aspossible.16Unwilling to denounce the present world in favor of an idealworld, the dog people I admire are those who act in companion-specieswebs with complexity, care, and curiosity. To explore further this kindof examined life, I will tell a story about one remarkable dog woman whobegan in the conformation culture of the show Aussies but who serves the106dEXAMINED LIVES




whole dogland community through her health and genetics knowledgeand activism.ACCOUNTING FOR GENES:C. A. SHARP IN AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD LANDC. A. Sharp embodies for me the practice of love of a breed in its his-torical complexity.17Evident in her kitchen table–produced Double HelixNetwork Newsand the Australian Shepherd Health and Genetics Insti-tute, which she helped found—not to mention in her critical reﬂection onher own practices as a breeder and her adoption of a too-small Aussie res-cue pooch, Sydney, after the death of the last dog of her breeding—Sharppractices a love that seeks knowledge, nurtures nondogmatic curiosity,and takes action for the well-being of dogs and people. Sharp’s world is agood place to look for people who know more at the end of the day thanthey did in the morning, because they owe it to their beloved, both askinds and as individuals.EXAMINED LIVESd107

C. A. Sharp and her rescue Australian shepherd, Sydney, in 2006. Photograph byLarry Green.




The dog-activist scene, or canine cosmopolitics, is also a good placeto look for examples of some of the major themes in contemporary scienceand technology studies, such as the fashioning, care, and feeding of “epis-temic objects” like the dog genome or genetic diversity; the consolidationand strengthening of facts important for dog health for communitiesstratiﬁed by scientiﬁc status hierarchies; the power of boundary objectssuch as disease genes to stitch together diverse social worlds, includingthose of pet owners, kennel club breeders, veterinarians, lay health activists,entrepreneurs, and bench researchers; online community formation in dig- ital culture; and the development of open health registries and databasesthat complexly operationalize the meaning of democratic, companion-species data apparatuses. Multitasking social activism in technoculturecharacterizes the work of dog people like Sharp, who are in the distinctminority in their breed clubs but who develop robust networks with thepotential to change business as usual. Their multitasking includes suchaction as building grief support systems, peer enforcement of new stan-dards of ethical behavior, above- and below-the-radar networking inhighly gendered worlds, nurturing sophisticated lay scientiﬁc and medicalknowledge, juggling the threat of lawsuits with risky open informationsharing, running advertising campaigns, raising money, and acting as doghealth advocates in science in a way that has become familiar in patientadvocacy groups in human biomedical naturecultures.Sharp begins her own origin story as a breeder with a traumaticmemory that she mobilizes rhetorically to establish grounds for a betterAussie community. She recounts ﬁnding herself in the vet’s oﬃce con-fronted with bad news about the very ﬁrst bitch she hoped to breed for alitter of her own. “Within a year and a half of obtaining my ﬁrst Aussiefor show and breeding, I slammed up against the reality of canine geneticdisease.”18Her dog Patte failed to get a hip rating of“good” or better fromthe Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, a necessary imprimatur for re -sponsible use of a dog in a breeding program.19A naive Sharp called Patte’sbreeder, who was also her mentor in Australian shepherds. The mentoragreed immediately that Patte could not be allowed to have the plannedlitter. But when Sharp said she’d call the owner of the proposed stud dogand explain why she was canceling the breeding, the mentor capitalizedon her power as friend and teacher and pushed Sharp’s guilt buttons. The108dEXAMINED LIVES




mentor told C.A. that if she told anyone the real reason, she would dam-age her mentor’s reputation as a breeder as well as that of the owners ofthe prospective sire. That last bit especially, Sharp reminded me, ﬂew inthe face of all logic, since the candidate father was unrelated to her Patte,but stress has a way of quelling logic. Properly intimidated, Sharp writesof her phone conversation with the owner of the stud dog, “I don’t re -member what I said, but I know it was a lie. . . . I felt dirty.”20From thatshaming experience, fortiﬁed with a growing knowledge of genetics (and,I would add, no small amount of sheer guts in the face of retaliation),Sharp became a breed health advocate and lay genetic counselor.This story is a classic conversion narrative. It is also a moving factualaccount of how denial, culpable ignorance, intimidation to enforce silence,and outright lies work to damage the dogs people claim to love. Sharpnamed this redolent complex the “Ostrich Syndrome.” It and the peopleshe calls “the Incorrigibles” run like a red thread through the rest of mystory, providing the friction against which a more progressive future ofdog and human coﬂourishing can be imagined and brought into being insome of the earth’s technocultural neighborhoods. It should not need say-ing, but in case any reader thinks that noticing or mobilizing a narrativeform somehow saps the juice of reality from the world, I insist that co-whelped meaning making and world making are material–semiotic litter-mates, that is, the stuﬀof robust, frolicking, bumptious, ﬂeshly reality.I will track Sharp’s ways of living and promoting examined livesthrough three transformative, storied events: () establishing the fact ofthe collie eye anomaly (CEA) gene in Aussies in the early s;21()redoing the Mendelian self through engagement with genetic diversitydiscourse in the late s; and () building a durable collective institu-tion, the Australian Shepherd Health and Genetics Institute (ASHGI)in the early s, thus supporting the struggle to defeat the Incorrigiblesand the Ostrich Syndrome once again, this time in the face of epilepsy.Sharp’s involvement in determining the mode of inheritance of CEA inher breed shows how “lay” agency can work in “clerical” canine geneticsresearch and publishing. This is a story of how a fact is brought intorobust being and changes its people, a favorite topic for science studiesscholars. Sharp’s participation in the Canine Genetics Discussion GroupListserv, CANGEN-L, in the late s and early s maps a changeEXAMINED LIVESd109




in her intellectual and moral ﬁeld, with a mutated emphasis from disease-linked genes to genetic diversity in the context of widespread turn-of-themillennium attention to evolution, ecology, biodiversity, and conservation.Finally, her work to make the ASHGI a reality illustrates the power ofdigital media coupled with old-fashioned, mostly women’s networking tobuild eﬀective, and aﬀective, technocultural communities.Sharp began breeding Australian shepherds in the late s, andshe served on ASCA’s genetics committee from the early s until ,when the board eliminated the committee in a controversial and poorlyexplained move. In the winter of , she began writing and distributingthe Double Helix Network News.The ﬁrst issue of the DHNNdescribeditself as a “kitchen-table” enterprise. By , about people—mostlybreeders, a few dog research professionals, and one or two ringers likeme—subscribed.22Learning desktop publishing, Sharp emphasized net-working, sharing information, educating one another, dealing with theOstrich Syndrome among breeders about genetic disease, and practicinglove of the breed through responsible genetics.With a BA in radio, TV, and cinema from California State Univer-sity at Fresno and a job as an accountant, Sharp has never claimed scien-tiﬁc insiderstatus. However, she properly claims expertstatus of a richkind, and she is regarded as an expert in both the breeder and profes-sional scientiﬁc communities. She coauthored a paper in the early swith the veterinary ophthalmologist L. F. Rubin on the mode of inheri-tance of an eye defect (CEA) in Aussies, engaged in collaborative researchon the relation of longevity to coeﬃcients of inbreeding in Aussies withDr. John Armstrong of the University of Ottawa in the s, and co-authored a paper in with Sheila Schmutz, of the University ofSaskatchewan, that mapped a coat-pattern candidate gene (KTLG) todog chromosome and excluded it as the merle gene. She has func-tioned as a clearinghouse for genetic data in her breed; performed pedi-gree analyses for speciﬁc conditions; taught breeders the rudiments ofMendelian, molecular, and population genetics and the practical stepsthat both conformation and working-dog breeders can and should take todetect and reduce genetic disease in their lines; and linked researcherswith the lay dog community to advance the ends of both. Sharp occupiesa mediating position among communities of practice from her location as110dEXAMINED LIVES




a self-educated, practically experienced, savvy activist who is willing andable to express controversial opinions within cross-linked social worlds.THE BIRTH OF A FACTSharp’s interest in the genetic basis of eye disorders dates to , whenher ﬁrst bitch was still a puppy. She went to an All Breed Fun Match nearPaso Robles, which turned out to have an eye clinic. Sharp asked whatit was about and had her dog checked. “I just got interested and startededucating myself.”23She made it a point afterward to get her dogs’ eyeschecked, which meant going annually to clinics at the local cocker spanielclub or else hauling dogs a few hours away to Stanford to a veterinaryophthalmologist. She started reading in genetics, guided by an Aussie per- son named Phil Wildhagen, “who is quite literally a rocket scientist, bythe way,” Sharp laughed gleefully. About , the Genetics Committee ofASCA put out a call for people to assist it in gathering data. “One thingled to another, and I was on the committee.”This was the period when the Genetics Committee was shifting itsattention from coat color, which had been of particular interest duringthe s when what counted as an Aussie was codiﬁed in the writtenstandard, to the more controversial topic of genetic disease. A breedergave the Genetics Committee two puppies aﬀected with collie eye anom-aly, a condition Aussies were not supposed to have. This breeder alsowent public with the fact of CEA in her dogs and was viliﬁed for her dis-closure by Aussie people terriﬁed of this kind of bad news in the breed.Sharp began writing a regular column in the Aussie Timesfor the Genet-ics Committee.24Starting with the original donated pair, the committee conducteda series of test matings to determine the mode of inheritance. Involvinga couple dozen dogs and their pups, these crosses were conducted in thekennels of two committee members, including Sharp, at their own ex -pense, which amounted to several thousand dollars. Most of the aﬀectedtest puppies were placed in pet homes, with advice to spay or neuter.Some were placed in a university for further research work. The commit-tee collected pedigree data and CERF (Canine Eye Registry Foundation)exam sheets on their test matings and on dogs brought to their attentionEXAMINED LIVESd111




by a growing number of interested Aussie breeders touched by the Timescolumn and word of mouth. The pattern of inheritance indicated anautosomal recessive gene. It was now technicallypossible to take actionto reduce the incidence of the condition.25But realpossibility remainedanother matter.First, it was more than Aussie breeders who denied the existenceof CEA in these dogs. Simply put, Sharp explained, “collie eye anomaly inAussies wasn’t ‘real’ when we started working with it.” For example, Sharpbrought a couple of puppies from test matings to an eye clinic at a showin Fresno only to be told by the ophthalmologist that Aussies did nothave the condition. Sharp obtained the exam by mobilizing her technicalvocabulary—a familiar move for lay activists in health and genetics advo-cacy. “Their mother has an optic discoloboma; [another relative] haschoroidal hyperplasia; please check these dogs. . . . Grumble, grumble,then he checked the puppies.” Sharp recalled breeders around the coun-try telling her about attempting to get genetic advice from vets who toldthem to relax—Aussies don’t have CEA; it’s not in the literature. Finally,armed with “nearly forty pedigrees with varying degrees of relationships,plus the test-mating data, I went in search of an American College of Vet-erinary Ophthalmology vet who might be interested in what I had.”A natural to what took science studies scholars a palace coup toestablish, Sharp emphasized that she could not make CEA “real” on herown—“certainly not with a BA in radio, television, and cinema.” The datahad to be published in the right place by the right person. “It’s not reces-sive until someone out there says it is; then it’s recessive.” “Out there”meant inside institutionalized science. No science studies scholar is sur-prised now by this social history of truth or by the recognition of it by asavvy “lay” knowledge producer working within a “clerical” culture.The popular but controversial ASCA Genetics Committee hadceased to be, so Sharp began looking for a collaborator to legitimate thedata and analysis she already had. She talked to several likely scientists,but they had other priorities. Frustrated, Sharp recalled insisting, “Look,until one of you people writes it up, it isn’t real.” Eﬀective corrective actiondepended on the reality of the fact. The chain ﬁnally led to Dr. LionelRubin, at the University of Pennsylvania, who was in the process of pub-lishing his book on inherited eye disease in dogs.26The book was already112dEXAMINED LIVES




in galleys, so the Aussie story did not make that publication. Sharp assem- bled the data and did the genealogy charts from the committee’s crossesand turned that over to Rubin, who hired a professional pedigree analystfor the ﬁnal charts. From the time Rubin began working with Sharp, pub-lication took two years.27With a proper pedigree at last, CEA in Aussiesas an autosomal recessive condition was on its way to becoming a fact.But the reality of the fact remained tenuous. In our interview,Sharp noted that the demand for independently replicated experimentsseems to have kept the “fact” out of the Aussie section of the handbook ofthe American College of Veterinary Ophthalmology that came out after. She emphasized that such expensive, ethically fraught research on alarge companion animal is unlikely to be replicated. “It wouldn’t have hap-pened the ﬁrst time if those of us out here in the trenches had not beeninterested enough to gather the data.” But she argued, “Why couldn’t theACVO say it’s probablyrecessive?” She added, “At least when someone outthere asks me now, I can send them a copy of the paper.” Finally, GeorgePadgett’s bible of inherited dog problems included the fact Sharp’s net-work made real.28Sharp had consulted George Padgett, of Michigan StateUniversity, an important institution in the apparatus of dog geneticsnatureculture, when she designed her pedigree analysis service and datasystem for Aussie breeders once the ﬁrst phase of the research indicatedthe mode of inheritance. Padgett conﬁrmed that her approach was scien-tiﬁcally sound, and Sharp put the service in place a year or so before shestarted the Double Helix Network Newsin .Sharp related with pride that the veterinary ophthalmologist GregAcland, at Cornell, told her that the Aussie CEA study provided one ofthe most impressive data sets on the mode of inheritance of a single-genetrait anywhere in the dog literature. The CEA recessive gene fact becamestronger in a robust network that included Rubin, Padgett, Acland, andSharp’s expert lay practices. This is the stuﬀof objectivity as a precious,situated achievement.29This is also the stuﬀof “science for the people”—and for the dogs. Mendelian genetics is hardly a new science in the latetwentieth century, but sustaining and extending its knowledge-productionapparatus still take work.But making the fact hold “inside” oﬃcial science was not enough.Inside the Aussie breed communities is just as crucial a location for thisEXAMINED LIVESd113




fact to get real and, thus, potentially eﬀective. Denial here takes a diﬀerentform from that in the scientiﬁc communities, and so the material–semi-otic rhetorics for persuading the fact into hard reality have to be diﬀerent.While Sharp set up her pedigree analysis service, a group of committedbreeders in Northern California took an extraordinary step. They devel-oped a test-breeding program and forms to document the breedings.Most important, they went public with their results. “As a group, theypurchased a full-page ad in the breed magazine admitting they had pro-duced CEA and listing the names of their carrier dogs. In a subsequentad they told about the test-breeding they had done to clear their relatedstock.”30Their group action forestalled the kind of attack that had beenmade on the donor of the ﬁrst pair of aﬀected puppies given to the genet-ics committee. This time, the Incorrigibles were relegated to the under-ground, and the test breeders reshaped the explicit community standardof practice. The standard might not always be followed, but the reversalof what is secret and what is public in principle was achieved.One ﬁnal bit has helped stabilize CEA as a fact in the Aussie world:emotional support for people who ﬁnd the disease in their lines. Dogpeople tend to see any “defect” in their dogs as a defect in themselves. Sharpcould not be the emotional support person in the Aussie genetic diseaseworld. “When people call me about genetic problems in their Aussies,I’m the ‘expert,’ not a kindred spirit.” Thus, Sharp asked the NorthernCalifornians who went public with their dogs’ and their own names tofunction as a support group to which she referred quite literally grievingbreeders.31Biosociality is everywhere.32By the time of our ﬁrst formal interview in , Sharp received farfewer reports of CEA in Aussies than she had seven to eight years before.Getting puppies checked through CERF had become standard ethicalpractice, and serious breeders did not breed aﬀected dogs. Puppy buyersfrom such breeders receive a copy of the CERF report right along withtheir new dog, as well as strict instructions about checking eyes of breed-ing stock annually if the new pup does not come with a spay/neuter con-tract. Facts matter.33By late , the date of our second formal conversation, using datamostly gathered from border collies and with the bulk of the money for re -search raised by the working border collie club, Cornell’s Gregory Acland114dEXAMINED LIVES




had found the gene for CEA and marketed a gene test through his com-pany, OptiGen.34Despite Sharp’s urging in the DHNNand in her fre-quent presentations at Aussie shows around the country,35Australianshepherd people failed to participate in signiﬁcant numbers in the Cor-nell study. However, one progressive Aussie breeder, Cully Ray, gaveAcland a substantial donation, and a few determined souls maneuveredCEA-aﬀected Aussies into the research that allowed Acland to determinethat Aussies and border collies (as well as collies) share the same gene forCEA and so can use the same DNA test. Sharp told me that one gutsyAussie owner oﬀered Acland a CEA-aﬀected puppy in the face of herbreeder’s negative reaction that approached stalking. Incorrigibles are not,well, corrigible.Nonetheless, by , CEA was no longer the signiﬁcant geneticproblem in Aussies that it once was, because eﬀective detection of aﬀecteddogs and carriers, followed by action, became common as a result of thework of committed health activists. The DNA test is nice to have, butmore traditional methods of detection (an eye exam) and using pedigreeanalysis to reduce the chance of mating carriers to each other had man-aged the crisis fairly well. The condition had become common because ofthe overuse in the s of a few popular sires, who happened to be car-riers for the recessive gene. The problem could become common again ifa single undetected popular sire cavorts in the gene pool. The knowledgeand technology exist now, but genetic health, as well as other kinds ofdog–human coﬂourishing, requires the ongoing work of examined lives.36BORN AGAINThe world of disease-linked genes is, however, only one component of thestory of dog genetics, especially in the era of biodiversity discourse. En -hancing and preserving genetic diversity are not the same thing as avoid-ing and reducing genetically linked illness. The discourses touch in manyplaces, but their divergences are reshaping the intellectual and moral worldsof many dog people. Sharp’s story is again instructive.In the mid-s Sharp was a subscriber to an Internet discussiongroup called KGENES. On that Listserv, Dr. Robert Jay Russell, a pop-ulation geneticist, rare dog breed activist, and president of the Coton deEXAMINED LIVESd115




Tulear Club of America, criticized breeding practices that reduce geneticdiversity in dog breeds and the AKC structure that keeps such practicesin place, even though the kennel club funds genetic disease research andmandates DNA-based parentage testing. Russell’s controversial postingswere blocked from the list several times, prompting him to log on undera diﬀerent e-mail account and reveal the censorship.These events led to the founding in of the Canine GeneticsDiscussion Group, CANGEN-L, moderated by Dr. John Armstrong, atthe University of Ottawa, to allow free genetics discussion among breed-ers and scientists. Until his death in , Armstrong also maintained theCanine Diversity Project Web site,37where one could obtain an elemen-tary education in population genetics, read about conservation projects forendangered wild canids, consider activist positions on dog breeding oper-ating outside the kennel clubs, and follow links to related matters. Con-cepts such as eﬀective population size, genetic drift, and loss of geneticdiversity structured the moral, emotional, and intellectual terrain.CANGEN-L was an impressive site, where it was possible both toobserve and to interact with other dog people learning how to alter theirthinking, and possibly their actions, in response to one another. The liststarted with thirty members, and Armstrong expected it to reach onehundred. Taxing its computer resources at the University of Ottawa,CANGEN had three hundred subscribers in the spring of . Acrimo -nious and fascinating controversies surfaced on CANGEN. Some partic-ipants complained that threads were ignored, and breeders periodicallyexpressed a sense that they were treated with disrespect by some scien-tists (and vice versa), though breeders and scientists were not mutuallyexclusive categories on CANGEN. Subscribers, scientists or not, occa-sionally left the list in a huﬀor in frustration. A few dogmatists dedicatedto the Truth as revealed to themselves cut a wide swath from time to time.All that said, in my opinion, CANGEN was an extraordinary siteof informed, democratic discussion among diverse actors. CANGEN’suncovering of my own yawning ignorance about such things as coeﬃ-cients of inbreeding prompted me to run back to my graduate schoolnotes on theoretical population genetics and sign up for the Cornell Uni-versity vet school online canine genetics course, an experience that abruptlyended my elitist disdain for oﬀerings of online distance learning.38I was116dEXAMINED LIVES




not alone on CANGEN in suddenly understanding that I had to knowmore than I did if I claimed to love kinds of dogs.Sharp welcomed the higher level of scientiﬁc discourse and theemphasis on evolutionary population genetics on CANGEN. She feltchallenged by the statistical arguments and wanted to explore the practi-cal consequences for the kind of breeding advice she gives in the DHNN.Beginning with the summer issue, the newsletter shifted direction.She began with an article explaining the doleful eﬀects of the “popular siresyndrome” on genetic diversity and made clear that line breeding is a formof inbreeding. In the fall issue, she explored how severe selectionagainst disease-linked genes can worsen the problem of the loss of geneticdiversity in a closed population. She cited with approval the success of thebasenji club in getting AKC approval for importing African-born dogsoutside the stud book, a daunting endeavor given AKC resistance.Sharp’s feature article in the winter issue of DHNNwas in-troduced by a quotation from a fellow CANGEN member who hadbeen especially outspoken, Dr. Hellmuth Wachtel, free collaborator ofthe Austrian Kennel Club and member of the Scientiﬁc Council of theVienna Schönbrunn Zoo. Sharp explained genetic load, lethal equiva-lents, popu lation bottlenecks, genetic drift, coeﬃcients of inbreeding, andfragmented gene pools. In the spring DHNN,Sharp published“Speaking Heresy: A Dispassionate Consideration of Cross-Breeding,”an article she expected, in her words, to make “the excretory material hitthe circulatory apparatus.” Love of the breed is messy.The new genetics is not an abstraction in dog worlds, whether oneconsiders the politics of owning microsatellite markers, the details of acommercial gene test, the problem of funding research, competing narra-tives of origin and behavior, the pain of watching a dog suﬀer genetic ill-ness, the personally felt controversies in dog clubs over breeding practices,or the cross-cutting social worlds that tie diﬀerent kinds of expertisetogether. When I asked Sharp what she thought breeders, geneticists, dogmagazine writers, and others might have learned from one another onCANGEN or other places, she zeroed in on the rapid and deep transfor-mations in genetics over the last decades. Her growth in genetic knowl-edge, she suggested, including her ability to handle the whole apparatusof molecular genetics, was natural and continuous—until she logged onEXAMINED LIVESd117




to CANGEN. “The only epiphany sort of thing I’ve been through waswhen I got on CANGEN and started reading all the posts from the pro-fessionals. . . . I knew there were problems with inbreeding, but I didn’thave a grasp about what the whole problem was until I started learningabout population genetics.” At that point, the analogies with politicallyfraught wildlife conservation and biodiversity loss hit home—and shemade the connection between her dog work and her volunteering as adocent at her local zoo, a connection that surfaced again in her struggleswith animal-rights opponents of a ballot initiative to reorganize and re -form the Fresno zoo in . Citizenship across species ties many knots,none of them innocent. Born again, indeed, but into ongoing complexity,curiosity, and care, not grace.IN THE FACE OF EPILEPSYBy the early s, Sharp had amassed a vast archive of breed health,genetic, and pedigree information, and she had initiated a variety of ser-vices for researchers, breeders, and ordinary Aussie people. What wouldhappen to her data if something happened to her? Also, she had beenthreatened with lawsuits more than once by breeders more worried abouttheir kennels’ winning reputations in show culture than about their dogsand their dogs’ oﬀspring across future generations. That the threatenedsuits were very unlikely to have succeeded would not shield her fromthe personal ﬁnancial disaster that having to defend against them wouldbring. In my experience, her discretion and practice of conﬁdentialitywere (and are) exemplary,39but that might not protect her from well-funded and ill-intentioned Incorrigibles. This matter strikes at the heartof pedigree analy sis and database accessibility. Also, her networks hadgrown way beyond the kitchen-table publishing, personal test breeding,and breed club–committee dimensions of the early years, although theface-to-face (and computer screen-to-screen) quality of dog health activ -ism remains striking.It was time for another transformation, this time into an incorpo-rated, nonproﬁt, dog health organization that would operate in coopera-tion with, but independent from, all the Aussie breed clubs. Sharp’s oldcolleague and friend on the ASCA DNA committee, Pete Adolphson,118dEXAMINED LIVES




approached her with a similar idea, and they decided to work together tobring the plan to fruition. With an MS in zoology, Adolphson had pub-lished on the eﬀects of aquatic toxicology on population genetics. Sharpand Adolphson recruited another former member of the ASCA DNAcommittee, George Johnson, a long-term Aussie owner and occasionalbreeder with a PhD in botany from North Carolina State University, whohad published on Australian shepherd genetics in the breed magazineAussie Times.In the Australian Shepherd Health and GeneticsInstitute incorporated in the United States as a federal (c)() organi-zation, and in July Sharp and her colleagues publicly announcedtheir infant institute. With the donated labor of a talented professionalWeb designer and Aussie breeder in Arizona, Claire Gustafson, ASHGIwent online as www.ashgi.org in January . Sharp serves as president.Joining her and Johnson after Adolphson left the board of directors, KylieMunyard—then a postdoctoral agricultural genetic analyst at MurdochUniversity and now an associate lecturer in molecular genetics at CurtinUniversity of Technology, Australia, as well as a competitor with her Aussiein agility, obedience, and, more recently, herding—came on the board.With two other activists, Munyard established the Australian ShepherdHealth Registry of Australasia, which, alas, had a short life even as it in -spired a project for an international Aussie health database.From the beginning, ASHGI entered into partnerships with caninegenetic researchers on projects that have included epilepsy research, be -havioral genetics, multiple drug resistance genes, cataracts, and others.40Encouraging people to give samples, ASHGI explains the research, spreadsthe word, and helps researchers to connect meaningfully in their work withthe dog world. With ﬁles augmented by those of Sharp’s deceased friendBetty Nelson, with whom she had done the original CEA test crosses,ASHGI maintains an extraordinary archive of documents relevant tobreed health and genetics. They have a breedwide cancer survey under-way as well as plans to develop an international online searchable healthdatabase (the International Directory for Australian Shepherd Health,IDASH), drawn from existing open health registries and voluntary sub-missions from Aussie owners. IDASH will computerize Sharp’s pedigree-analysis and make it available as a paid ASHGI service.41Gestat ing theidea for IDASH for about a year already and then further prompted byEXAMINED LIVESd119




BEACON, the bearded collie health organization’s Web site, in Sharpnetworked at the Canine Health Foundation conference with activists inother breeds, especially bearded collies, Bernese mountain dogs, and mal-amutes.42Each ASHGI project has a hard-working committee coordi-nating with Sharp. About a dozen very active people make ASHGI work;percent of them are women; percent of them live deeply entwinedwith cherished individual dogs as well as with the breed. Their labor oflove would fall apart without constant Internet-mediated communicationand considerable technoscientiﬁc professional and self-taught expertise.In my terms, cyborgs are among ASHGI’s companion species.Networking, connecting care with knowledge, and collective com-mitment are what get my attention in ASHGI. No one could miss thevolunteer expertise and labor at the heart of the practice of love of thebreed. Three activities make this matter vivid: the“Ask an Expert” featureof the Web site, the Ten Steps to a Healthier Australian Shepherd pro-gram for breeders, and support of a broad range of action to address epi -lepsy in the breed.Sharp had for years answered an avalanche of e-mail questionsabout Aussie health and genetics, but with ASHGI she organized a corpsof committed volunteer experts with diverse experience in the breed.E-mail links appear on each subject-matter page as well as several otherplaces on the Web site to connect people to the relevant volunteer. One ofthose volunteers who give their expertise for free is Kim Monti, formerlya research chemist with a career in animal health product research andnow a business consultant. Long active in search-and-rescue work withher dogs, as well as conformation and obedience, Monti is an Aussiebreeder whose Foxwood Kennel is in New Mexico.43The driving forcebehind and chair of the Ten Steps program, Monti has also been active inthe eﬀort to reduce the incidence of epilepsy in the breed. Ten Steps grewfrom an intense discussion about breeder ethics in the EpiGENES con-ﬁdential online chat group, whose international membership representsthe sweep of health cultures throughout the breed.44Participants drewup numerous drafts before settling on a list of ten ethical actions everybreeder should take to cultivate a culture of openness about problems,mutual support, health screening, and targeted research. The tone andcontent are caught by these four pledges: “I support the open disclosure120dEXAMINED LIVES




of all health issues that aﬀect Australian Shepherds, utilizing publiclyaccessible canine health registries in the country of my residence when-ever possible”; “I do not speak ill of any breeder or breeding program thathas produced aﬀected Australian Shepherds”; “I compassionately supportand assist owners of aﬀected dogs in gathering information on the geneticdiseases that have stricken their dogs”; and “Before being bred, all of mydogs are DNA proﬁled with an accredited laboratory and the resultsmade public, if such services are available within my country, or before mystock is exported to a country that has DNA proﬁling available.”Breeders take the Ten Step pledge on the honor system, of course. Nomandatory regulatory structure supports these practices in the breed clubsor elsewhere, for better and for worse. The existence of such a clear set ofprinciples can be a powerful educational tool and a potent instrumentof peer pressure. The pledge is taken in the ﬁrst-person singular—“I”—but the statement is the fruit of rich collective processes among peopledeeply aﬀected by the issues who see themselves to be directly responsi-ble for making positive change happen. In many senses, Ten Steps is anexemplary instance of bioethics in transnational canine technoculture.For example, the program is simultaneously a response to the geneticiza-tion of health and illness across species, with its market-based research,testing, and therapeutic regimes; a model for responsible individual andcollective action; an example of social activism in women’s communities;a window to the casting of political and scientiﬁc action in ethical idiomsand instruments; a product of screen-to-screen as well as face-to-face net-working in digital culture; an active shaping of the terms of operation ofkey emergent objects of digital culture, such as open databases; and a fas-cinating conﬁguration of aﬀective and epistemological engagement withkinds of dogs, individual dogs, and dog people.Ten Steps emerged from an epilepsy-focused conﬁdential chat group,EpiGENES. Why is epilepsy so important in current dog culture, in-cluding Australian shepherd worlds? Why did a chat group have to beconﬁdential? Are purebred dogs really sick all the time, seizing at everyopportunity? The answer to the last question for Australian shepherdsre mains “no”; Aussies are a generally healthy breed, with a mean life ex -pec tancy of over twelve years. Butgenetic disease incidence has increasedin recent decades, and that is unnecessary and inexcusable.45Nonetheless,EXAMINED LIVESd121




are we really certain that so-called idiopathic epilepsy deﬁnitely is a geneticdisease or complex of diseases? What is the incidence of epilepsy in Aus-tralian shepherds, and how has that changed over the last twenty yearsor so? What would it take to know the answer to these questions? Whycan epilepsy so concentrate what is at stake in the kind of examined livesC. A. Sharp has worked so hard to promote and practice?In the s, epilepsy was hardly heard of among Aussies, buttwenty-ﬁve years later it is one of the two most frequent diseases in thebreed, and denying its heritability has become very diﬃcult. Show linesare riddled with it, and at least two nonshow lines are aﬀected.46Epilepsyﬁrst cropped up in obvious family clusters in the oﬀspring of Aussies ex -ported to the United Kingdom in the early s, and the British breed-ers reacted with silence, coercion, and threats to those who spoke up.U.S. breeders tended to regard the U.K. scene as of no interest to them-selves, but when reports of the disorder in U.S. dogs became more andmore frequent, many U.S. breeders proceeded to react the same way thatU.K. breeders had. Easy to misrecognize, primary or idiopathic (heritable)epilepsy was still diagnosed in by excluding other causes. Seizurescan be caused by many things; the cause of inherited epilepsy is not yetnailed down to a mapped gene or genes (much less to gene regulation orepigenetic patterning); epilepsy usually does not manifest until well intoadulthood, making it hard to breed away from; and living with epilepsy isextremely diﬃcult for the dogs, their companion people, and their breed-ers. All of this opens the doors wide to the full panoply of Incorrigibleantics and the associated Ostrich Syndrome. As Sharp put it, “An exampleof the Ostrich Syndrome gone malignant can be found in my breed. . . .There are many Ostriches who have or have produced epileptic Aussies,but the testing doesn’t get done, they won’t cooperate with an on-goingresearch project, and what ‘really’ happened is the dog hit its head/gotintoan ant poison/had sun stroke, and so on. Apparently these dogshit their heads, eat poison, or overheat every three to four weeks.”47Thestakes are high for developing a direct DNA-based screening test, thestrongest forceps available in technoculture for pulling ostrich heads intothe bracing air on such matters.Readers of this chapter will have noticed that EpiGENES was aconﬁdential chat group, a powerful clue to the stigmatizing nature of122dEXAMINED LIVES




diseases suspected of being hereditary.48The evidence for the stigma andthe attack response of Incorrigibles is not hard to ﬁnd. Sharp began apowerful article on epilepsy in the Australian Shepherd Journalin with a horriﬁc seizure log for one young bitch who had to be euthanizedin , six months after her ﬁrst grand mal seizure. The gutsy ownerof this dog, Pat Culver, placed a memorial ad in the September/Octoberissue of the Aussie Times,giving the registered name, the cause ofdeath, and two generations of pedigree. Some breeders with closely relateddogs exploded and attacked Culver; other people discussed the need forpositive response. Along with Culver, another Aussie lover named AnnDeChant, who had produced two litters with epileptic pups (and hassince cleared epilepsy from her breeding program), and Sharp tried torally breed action, but Sharp told me in our interview in November that people were afraid, and attention died down.The Incorrigibles attacked those who spoke up and continued tobreed ﬁrst-degree relatives of aﬀected dogs without telling anyone any-thing. In addition, these people slowed down positive response to thedogs’and their people’s suﬀering by refusing to give samples from aﬀecteddogs and their close relatives to the two then-existing research programs,even though those projects held all data conﬁdential. By the time ofSharp’s and my interview in , however, things had turned aroundbecause of a resolute grassroots movement of Aussie activists, who alsocame under the umbrella of ASHGI. That grassroots movement is one ofthe reasons that by the spring of , a DNA test speciﬁc to at least oneAussie version of epilepsy seemed likely. (The genetics of the disease isnot the same for all breeds, and a single-gene inheritance for any form ofepilepsy is a weak fact at this point.)At the Aussie National Specialty Show in Bakersﬁeld, California,in , three Arizona women and Ann DeChant from Michigan, all ofwhom had produced dogs who developed epilepsy and were committedto doing something about it, began to hatch a multifaceted, long-rangeplan. The Arizona gang included Kristin Rush, who became the chair-person of the Australian Shepherd Genetic Epilepsy Network and Educa -tion Service (AussieGENES), which came into ASHGI’s structure; ClaireGustafson, who was the Web site designer for ASHGI; and KristinaChurchill. Along with Gustafson, Rush, and Churchill, DeChant set upEXAMINED LIVESd123




EpiGENES in , while Gustafson and Heidi Mobley designed anattention-getting ad campaign in the major Aussie breed journals, withthe ads bearing the signatures of people who had produced epileptic dogsand who refused to stay quiet any longer. The idea for the ﬂeshed-outorganization of AussieGENES came from the chat group EpiGENES.Sharp looked on, cheered, and helped where she could, including writing“The Road to Hell” for the issue of the Australian Shepherd Journalthat published the ﬁrst ads. That article attracted notice, winning a Dog Writers Association of America Maxwell Award. Also, both of themajor breed registries, the ASCA and the United States Australian Shep-herd Association, underwrote part of the expenses for the ad campaigns.There was even a Parade of Veterans and Titleholders at the AussieNational Specialty Show, in which several of the people who submittedbios for their dogs included the information that near kin had epilepsy.Even one of the titleholding dogs proudly walking with its human waslisted as suﬀering from epilepsy. Sharp reported that the crowd wasamazed, shocked, and deeply moved, with many people approaching theowner of the aﬀected dog to thank her for her honesty. The attack culturewas deﬁnitely losing its ability to silence and intimidate.The Incorrigibles met another formidable force in the pet owner PamDouglas, her aﬄicted dog Toby, and the charitable foundation Douglasestablished to increase public awareness about canine epilepsy and todevelop means to ﬁght the disease.49A lawyer who had practiced on theEast Coast and then moved to California, Douglas had raised three chil-dren with her husband, and they found themselves wanting anotherfamily member after their human oﬀspring had ﬂedged. And so, afterexamining all the standard health tests for eyes and hips, they bought anAustralian shepherd puppy. The puppy’s sire was from a well-regarded“Hall of Fame” kennel with many winners in conformation and versatil-ity competitions. Douglas and her husband did not want a show dog oran athlete; they wanted a pet. Their puppy, Toby, had a series of misdiag-nosed diﬃculties beginning at the age of ten months, culminating in aterrifying grand mal seizure at thirteen months. The process of diagnosisand subsequent eﬀorts to control the disease have been emotionally andphysically painful, for humans and dog alike, not to mention expensive for124dEXAMINED LIVES




the Douglases. Toby has major diﬃculties and a troubled prognosis, butthe good news is that at over four years of age, Toby has a good life in spiteof very serious and only partly controlled epilepsy and debilitating eﬀectsfrom both seizures and medications. The best news is that he has hard-drive, focused human herders for family members, who are not about tobe intimidated.Assuming the best, a still naive Douglas contacted Toby’s breederand the breeder of Toby’s sire after the youngster’s epilepsy became clearand had what she described as a long series of conversations that went no -where. The Australian Shepherd Journalarticle on Douglas’s story reportedthat these well-known breeders with a beautiful Web site about qualitydogs who had all the standard health clearances (a site that, as far as Ican tell, has not been updated since April and received more thantwenty thousand unique visitors between December and December) did not respond to her pleas to contribute blood samples of theirdogs who were closely related to Toby to the major dog genetic epilepsyresearch program at the University of Missouri.50Douglas refused to letthings go at that. She talked at length with Sharp, who lent an ear andsympathy while Douglas educated herself about the science of canineepilepsy and the realities of supporting dogs and dog people through theillness. Douglas then published a heart-catching full-color ad in bothmajor Aussie breed journals in , asking for owners of Toby’s relativesto contribute DNA samples to the Canine Epilepsy Network. The ad wascalled “The Face of Epilepsy.” The advertisements published by Toby’sFoundation are radical in dogland. The classic ﬁrst-person biographicalsemiotics, portraiture, material signiﬁers of family, narrative pathos, appealsto take action, enticements to modern selfhood through participation inscientiﬁc research, and registered genealogy (even if indicating geneticdisease) ought to be eﬀective in U.S. middle-class culture. I for one amcaught and proud of it. I contribute to Toby’s Foundation and wish myreaders would, too. To notice how material–semiotic labor is done doesnot vitiate it ethically or politically but locates it culturally and histori-cally, within which nonreductive judgment is possible.No one came forward with information about any of Toby’s sib-lings, but one call linked Toby to Shadow, an Aussie puppy who had beenEXAMINED LIVESd125




“The Face of Epilepsy,” Australian Shepherd Journal(May/June 2004). Courtesy of Toby’sFoundation and Pam Douglas.




whelped in November from the kennel of Toby’s sire and who hadsuch bad seizures that he had to be euthanized at eleven months of age.Shadow’s humans helped craft a memorial ad for their dog too, asking forcooperation with research by giving blood samples from aﬀected dogsand their close relatives. Including as many of these kin in the samples aspossible is crucial for mapping genes of interest. The ad campaign hasbeen very public and very eﬀective. Pet owners, or at least Pam Douglasand her growing networks, have made their power felt in the breeders’purebred scene, where the mere pet buyer can feel decidedly secondary.One of the labs looking for the gene or genes responsible for herita-ble epilepsy in Aussies, VetGen, dropped out in ,51while Gary John-son’s lab in the Canine Epilepsy Network at the University of Missouricontinued its research. AussieGENES, the DHNN,Toby’s Foundation,and ASHGI have made sample submissions to the researchers a highpriority. In , the year of Toby’s birth, the Canine Epilepsy Networkhad only ninety-nine samples from Aussies, with sixteen aﬀected dogs. By, they had over a thousand samples, more than for any other breed,including two extended multigenerational families. The patterns began toindicate that an autosomal recessive allele at only one locus might be themain culprit for this form of epilepsy. In early , gene identiﬁcationseemed near, and fund-raising was under way in Aussie land to obtainseventy thousand dollars to help support that ﬁnal push. Many knotsstill remain to be tied in the technocultural assemblages needed to buildand stabilize consequential facts, such as an Aussie epilepsy gene, butthe activists in ASHGI and Toby’s Foundation have invented some verypromising cat’s cradle patterns.A DNA screening test is no panacea and certainly no cure foraﬀected dogs, but in dog breeding, where identiﬁed mutations do provestrongly causal for a disorder, a reliable screening test can identify carri-ers and indicate carrier-to-carrier crosses to be avoided. The key is thecommunity’s relation to the test and to its technocultural apparatus. TheAshkenazi Jewish community in New York City has virtually eliminatedthe birth of babies with Tay-Sachs disease by ﬁrst supporting research andthen using a gene test, even while aﬀected children continue to be born toother communities around the world with very diﬀerent relationships tothe cultural apparatuses of research, medicine, and genetic citizenship.52EXAMINED LIVESd127




Not all stories about gene tests are so benign, in either human or dogworlds, but maybe this Aussie tale can have a happy ending.My shaggy dog story about webs of action in the postgenomic age isabout an old symbiosis—that among knowledge, love, and responsibility.Dog genetics is a social network as much as a biotechnical one. Neithermicrosatellite markers, nor ten-generation pedigrees, nor DNA-based genetests fall from the sky; they are the fruit of historically located natural-cultural work. Breed standards, dog genomes, and canine populations arematerial–semiotic objects that shape lives across species in historicallyspeciﬁc ways. This chapter has asked how heterogeneous sorts of exper-tise and caring are required to craft and sustain scientiﬁc knowledge forthe beneﬁt of kinds of dogs, as well as individual pooches, within a par-ticular, noninnocent, naturalcultural context. The story of C. A. Sharpnavigates the linkages of lay and professional work as well as the linkagesbetween knowledge and aﬀect in technoculture. Genetic ﬂows in dogsand humans have implications for meanings of species and race; originstories remain potent in scientiﬁc culture; and molecular biotechnologycan be mobilized to sustain ideas of diversity and conservation. Internetsociality shapes alliances and controversies in dog worlds, and popularand commercial practices infuse technical and professional worlds andvice versa.None of this is breaking news in science studies, and none of itresolves the contradictions of biowealth, biocapital, and biopolitics, butall of it holds my attention as a scholar, a citizen, and a dog person. Sharpand her networks grapple with matters that shape human and nonhumanlives profoundly; they make a diﬀerence. Interested in the symbioses ofcompanion species of both organic and inorganic kinds, I end with fusions.The passage of the leash law in Denver, Colorado, in the s enclosedthe commons of my childhood dog–human world. The proprietary re -gimes and DNA-testing surveillance mechanisms at the turn of the mil-lennium map and enclose the commons of the genome and mandate newkinds of relations among breeders, researchers, dog owners and guard -ians, and dogs. Local and global crises of the depletion of cultural andbiological diversity lead to novel kinds of enclosure of lands and bodiesin zoos, museums, parks, and nations. Telling about a kind of dog also128dEXAMINED LIVES




meant coming to terms with the complexities and consequences of histo-ries of ranching and mining, the dispossession of Californios and NativeAmericans, and the modern eﬀorts to constitute an economically, bio-logically, politically, and ethically viable human–animal agropastoralismout of the shards of that inheritance. No wonder that I am looking in thejoined story of dogs and people for a vivid sense of a still possible com-mon life and future from which we can continue to build.DIVERSITY MURDERSWith homage to Charis Thompson for her true ﬁction story in sciencestudies, “Confessions of a Bioterrorist,”53I conclude “Examined Lives”with a foray into detective ﬁction, starting with my (reedited) post toCANGEN-L on January , :Okay, List Members, I’ll start a shaggy dog murder story for geneticdiversity and see if anyone wants to help write this pulp contributionby committee! I’d like three friends to be the sleuths, all humanalpha bitches of a certain age and each with diﬀerent appendages indog worlds.One sleuth is a long-term breeder of herding dogs; and sincewe’re speculating, I take the liberty of choosing Australian shepherds,the best example of herders anyway <vbg>. This breeder is an Anglowoman from a ranching family of modest means who lives inCalifornia’s Central Valley not far from Fresno. She has tried hardover four decades, ever since Aussies became institutionalized as abreed, to produce dogs who could herd with matchless skill, win inconformation, excel in obedience and agility sports, and serve as petswith dignity. This woman graduated from high school, is self-educated, very smart, and richly connected in dog worlds, especiallyin the herding and working dog breeds. Next to herders, livestockguardian dogs have a special place in her heart, and she’s informedherself about the population and ecological history of the variousLGDs in Europe and Eurasia and their construction as institutionalizedbreeds in the United States and Europe. She took the side of the anti-AKC faction in the great Aussie wars of the s, but she’s beenactive in both of the registries for the last few years. Lately, she’s madefriends with a health and genetics activist in Fresno who publishes anewsletter that’s making a lot of people mad. This sleuth has herEXAMINED LIVESd129




doubts about the ways scientists treat breeders and about the hardnessof the data that scientists use to make claims about breeding practices.She’s a hard-headed realist about dogs, and there’s not much shewouldn’t do to stay true to her commitment to their well-being.She’s also one of the few people who can talk to both ranchers andenvironmentalists about wolf reintroductions in the West. She isactive in the Navajo Sheep Project and in solidarity with Diné bí’íína’. No friend of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals,nonetheless she works with them to expose the conditions of thefactory-farming meat industry.My second sleuth is a molecular geneticist at UC Davis who isforming a venture capital start-up company in order to research andmarket diagnostic kits for genetic diseases aﬀecting toy breeds mainly.Her company is called Genes ‘R’ Us, and Toys ‘R’ Us is suing her fortrademark infringement after her marketing campaign got toys andgenes a little too confused. She has papillons and competes at a highlevel in agility meets, where she met sleuth . She has been connectedrecently with Southern California assisted reproduction clinics thatare taking steps toward cloning humans. She has a strong interest inthe frozen zoo collection at the San Diego Zoo and in the transnationalworld of conservation biology and politics. She’s a second-generationChinese American, and partly because she has an uncle in China whoworks as a panda biologist, she became involved with the politics ofinternational panda population restoration in both zoos and wildlifepreserves. She’s no stranger to the problems of small populations.Besides her four papillons, she has a Newfoundland puppy and twoaging golden retriever–whippet crosses she got from a shelter ﬁfteenyears ago.My third sleuth is a nutritional biochemist at Ralston Purina,and she went to graduate school at Cornell with sleuth . Like manyAfrican American women of her generation who earned chemistrydegrees, she took a job in industry rather than academia. Her researchhas put her right in the middle of controversies about diets tailored tometabolic disorders in companion animals, and all the ideological andcommercial battles about dogs made her interested in the geneticissues in allergies, digestive malfunctions, reproductive ill health, andmetabolic diseases. With sleuth , she’s trying to get studies funded totest hypotheses about loss of genetic diversity and ill health. Shestarted by asking if purebred dogs really are “sicker” now than in thepast, and if so why. She’s ended up the target of suspicion by both herdivision chief at the company and advocates of unprocessed “natural130dEXAMINED LIVES




foods” for dogs. Her passion has led her to form research consortiawith veterinarians, modeled after AIDS community research eﬀorts,to try to get good data on the cheap from vet practices. All of this ledher to an analysis of nutrition, hunger, health, and illness for bothhuman and nonhuman animals around the world that has more to dowith justice and sustainable agroecology than with genes. When shecan get free of all this, she brings her two chow chows to assistedliving communities as therapy dogs. She is proving that chows canhave great temperaments. This lady takes on hard projects as a wayof life.The three women and their Aussie, chow, and papillon poochesgot together for a vacation at a summer dog camp only to discoverthat they each have more than a few ideas about the recent murder ofa famous dog writer who had authored a series of controversial storiesin the New Yorkerabout how the Dog Genome Project would ﬁnallythrow light on behavioral genetics in humans as well as in dogs. Thewriter had infuriated everyone, from those worried about a neweugenics, to advocates of cloning on demand, to animal rights activists,to bench scientists, to breeders, to those committed to dogs’ diﬀerencefrom humans as an ethical principle crucial to canine well-being.But before the murder is solved, the trail takes our sleuths intocommercial, laboratory, conservation, and dog breeding and showworld science and politics that put genetic diversity on the talk showsall over the country and brought the AKC to its knees.In response to my e-mailed prompt, “But I am looking for a suspect,”C. A. Sharp, my obvious model for the Diversity Murders’ “health andgenetics activist in Fresno who publishes a newsletter that’s making a lotof people mad,” posted back:Hmmm. Maybe pups.com is also a major shareholder in the corporatelab that does AKC’s DNA-PV [parentage veriﬁcation testing] and hasbeen pushing AKC toward mandatory. Puppy millers don’t like this.Many non-commercial breeders are not exactly delighted for a varietyof reasons. Maybe a zealot who espouses the need for mandatoryDNA and open disease registries has been publicly critical ofpups.com’s mixed motivations.You aren’t helping, Donna. I’ve put ﬁction-writing on hold so Icould deal with a backlog of canine genetics projects. Now you’resucking me back in with canine ﬁction!EXAMINED LIVESd131




I responded to the list:C.A., now we’re purring! Fabulous ideas. Lists of suspects arebeginning to suggest themselves. Consider canine genetic ﬁctiondouble tasking and deﬁnitely part of getting those geneticsprojects done. . . .Have you seen the new company name that is associated withthe [dog-cloning] Missyplicity Project? Genetic Savings and Clone.See Wired,March . That—plus my new ethical obligation, madeclear in Lazaron BioTechnologies’ ad right next to Thorpe-Vargasand Cargill’s article on cloning in the March DogWorld,of“saving agenetic life”—has me thinking CANGEN might also ask how theextraordinary genetic popular and commercial culture we are gestatingin aﬀects our eﬀorts to think clearly about scientiﬁc issues. “Right tolife” discourse always makes me break out in hives, and “saving agenetic life” is just such a powerful allergen.On March , C.A. wrote back:I’m already multi-tasking (what woman doesn’t?). And my processor(not to mention my husband) is ﬂashing error messages warning methat I am about to exceed my RAM!To be continued . . . Watch for the series on Amazon.com, where pur-chases will earn the Australian Shepherd Health and Genetics Institute apercentage. Move over, Susan Conant!54132dEXAMINED LIVES




5. CLONING MUTTS,SAVING TIGERSBioethical Angst and Questions ofFlourishingThe breed, any breed, is a river. It began ﬂowing before it got to us andit will continue to ﬂow past where we see it. . . . If we truly love thisriver we will recognize that it belongs to all of us now and to its futurevisitors, and that we cannot simply be individuals using it as weplease for our personal and immediate beneﬁt only.—Linda Weisser, January , , Pyr-L@apple.ease.lsoft.comCloning companion animals is where evolution meets the freemarket; those who can aﬀord it will save what they like and leavethe rest to burn.—Lou Hawthorne, CEO, Genetic Savings and Clone, Inc.,May , EMERGENTS IN TECHNOCULTUREPleasures and anxieties over beginnings and endings abound incontemporary dog worlds. When technocultures are awash in mil-lennial discourses, why shouldn’t dogs get in an apocalyptic bark atﬁrst and last things? Canine tales demand a hearing; they concern thedramatis personae in the ecological theater and the evolutionary playof rescripted naturecultures in technonatural, biosocial modernity.1Iwant to know how the emergence of an ethics of cross-species ﬂourish-ing, compassion, and responsible action is at stake in technosavvy dogcultures engaged with genetic diversity, on the one hand, and cloning,on the other.In the past, I wrote about cyborgs, a kind of companion-speciescongeries of organisms and information machines emergent from theCold War. Also on my mind have been genetically engineered labora-tory organisms such as OncoMouse™, those companion species link-ing commercial, academic, medical, political, and legal domains.Emergent over the time of “species being” (in the philosopher’sidiom) for both participants, dogs and humans as companion




species suggest distinct histories and lives compared with cyborgs andengineered mice.The term companion speciesrefers to the old co-constitutive linkbetween dogs and people, where dogs have been actors and not just recip-ients of action. Companion speciesalso points to the sorts of being madepossible at interfaces among diﬀerent human communities of practice forwhom “love of the breed” or “love of dogs” is a practical and ethical imper-ative in an alwaysspeciﬁc, historical context, one that involves science,technology, and medicine at every turn. Further, companion speciesdesig-nates webbed bio-social-technical apparatuses of humans, animals, arti-facts, and institutions in which particular ways of being emerge and aresustained. Or not.Traﬃcking in category making and unmaking, the play between kinand kind is essential to the ﬁgure of companion species. What is the costof kinship, of category making and unmaking, and for whom? The con-tent of any obligation is dependent on the thick and dynamic particular-ities of relationships-in-progress, that is, of kin and kind. The commonmatrix for these diverse claims on us is an ethics of ﬂourishing. ChrisCuomo suggests that the core ecological feminist ethical starting pointis a “commitment to the ﬂourishingor well-being, of individuals, species,and communities.”2Flourishing, not merely the relief of suﬀering, is thecore value, one I would like to extend to the emergent entities, human andanimal, in technocultural dog worlds. Compassionate action is, of course,crucial to an ethics of ﬂourishing.Living in a companion-species world, where kin and kind are emer-gent and unsettled and also have unequally distributed life-and-deathconsequences, is living in a force ﬁeld subject to “torque.” Bowker and Stardevelop the idea of torque to describe the lives of those who are subjectto twisted skeins of conﬂicting categories and systems of measure orstandardization. Where biographies and categories twine in conﬂictingtrajectories, there is torque.3The fabric of technocultural dog worlds istorqued along several axes.In the United States, dogs became “companion animals,” both incontrast and in addition to “pets” and “working and sporting dogs,” aroundthe late s in the context of social scientiﬁc investigations into therelations of animals such as dogs to human health and well-being.4Vet134dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




schools, such as the one at the University of Pennsylvania, and assistance-dog programs, such as the Delta Society, were key arenas of action. Thereare many more threads to the story of the transformation from pets tocompanion animals, but I want only to make three points. First, dogs livein several twisted, braided categories at once; their biographies and theirclassiﬁcations are in a relation of torque. Second, changes in terminologycan signal important mutations in the character of relationships—com-mercially, epistemologically, emotionally, and politically. Third, the termcompanion animalshas more than an accidental relationship with othertechnocultural categories that achieved potency around , such asbiodiversity, genome, quality-of-life management, outcomes research, andall-the-world a database. “New” names mark changes in power, symboli-cally and materially remaking kin and kind.A peculiar attitude to history characterizes those who live in thetimescape of the technopresent. They (we?) tend to describe everythingas new, as revolutionary, as future oriented, as a solution to problems ofthe past. The arrogance and ignorance of this attitude hardly need com-ment. So much is made to appear “new” in technoculture, linked to “revo-lutions” such as those in genetics and informatics. Getting through theday in technoculture is impossible without witnessing some old stabil-ity wobble and some new category make its claim on us. Dog worldsare hardly immune to this curious form of experience. To give a homelyexample, where having one’s own human teeth cleaned used to qualify oneas an upstanding biosocial citizen, hard-hearted are the dog people whohave not felt the disapproval of their vets for failing to have their pooches’ivories tended. Similarly, where once being tested for human genetic dis-ease seemed all one could handle, today failure to have testing done andto raise money for research into the most prevalent canine genetic dis-eases weighs on the conscience. Sharing the risk of gum disease and ofgenetic biosociality is part of the companion-species bond.However, if revolutions here are mostly hype, discontinuities andmutated ways of being are not. Categories abound in technoculturalworlds that did not exist before; these categories are the sedimentationsof processual relationships that matter. Emergents require attention topro cess, relationship, context, history, possibility, and conditions for ﬂour-ishing.5Emergents are about the apparatuses of emergence, themselvesCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd135




braided of heterogeneous actors and action in torqued relationship. Com-panion animals, themselves emergent entities, require an inquiry into“what is to be done,” that is, into what some call ethics or, in the domainsI live in, bioethics. I want to explore this matter in relation to practicesand discourses of canine genomic diversity and pet dog cloning.First, I venture a word on bioethics, perhaps one of the most boringdiscourses to cross one’s path in technoculture. Why is bioethics boring?Because too often it acts as a regulatory discourse after all the really in-teresting, generative action is over. Bioethics seems usually to be about notdoing something, about some need to prohibit, limit, police, hold the lineagainst looming technoviolations, to clean up after the action or preventthe action in the ﬁrst place. Meanwhile, reshaping worlds is accomplishedelsewhere. In this unfair cartoon, bioethics is ﬁrmly on the side of society,while all the lively, promising monsters are on the side of science and tech-nology. If science studies scholars have learned anything in the last decades,it is that the categorical dualism between society and science, culture andnature, is a setup to block a grasp of what is going on in technoculture,including what is to be done in order that companion species ﬂourish. Ifbioethics is to be part of science studies, it will have to get real. Bioethicsis going to have to become a besmirched ontological laborer in the politi-cal economies of Biocapital,volume .Bioethics has inserted its speculum into the worlds of reproductionof just about all kin and kinds, sexual and asexual, in vivo and in vitro.Consider the diﬃculties that independent radio producer Rusten Hog-ness experienced as he developed a ﬁve-minute National Public Radiopiece on human cloning for The DNA Files II,aired in the fall of .Hogness’s interview subjects—developmental biologists, nuclear transferspecialists, and other biologists involved in mammalian-cloning eﬀorts—all argued that the crucial ethical questions in the human case lie in thematerialities of the biology of cloning. There, the poorly understood pro -cesses of nuclear reprogramming and organismic pattern formation inepigenesis are crucial to the possibility of oﬀspring who could be healthythroughout the life span, assuming they could get through the rigors offetal development. Human cloning in current conditions of knowledgeand practice would cause deep suﬀering to large numbers of sure-to-be-damaged oﬀspring and to potential parents, medical staﬀ, researchers,136dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




teachers, and others. Spontaneous and induced abortions for defectivefetuses would be only the beginning of the suﬀering, in present and, atleast near, future conditions of knowledge and practice.Partly because of the widespread cultural belief, too often fosteredby scientists themselves, that genes-as-code determine everything in biol-ogy, just as a program is determined by its code, the complexities of devel-opment are given short shrift in public discussions of cloning. Hognessand his biologist subjects turned to a metaphor of a musical score andperformance, instead of the encyclopedia or the code, to gain a better gripon the layered materialities of genetics and development. In doing so, theydirected attention to the collaborative, complex, processual, and perfor-mative relationships that make up biological reality. Getting inside thatreality could direct ethical attention to the probable lived experience ofcloned and cloning subjects. The ethical and the technical here are hand-in-glove or, perhaps better, nucleus-in-cytoplasm.All of the scientists Hogness interviewed argued that humancloning should be unacceptable for a long time, because the oﬀspring solikely would be hurt, as would the universe of people among whom thoseoﬀspring would come. The conditions for ﬂourishing are, put mildly, notmet. This sort of consideration ought to unsettle the “misplaced con-creteness” of conventional discussions of human cloning. Too frequently,bioethical discussion asks whether it is proper to copy an individual, toscramble the generations, to play God, et cetera, as if these were mattersfor “society,” while matters such as our ability to understand the complex-ity of genomics and epigenetics are relegated to the category of the “scien-tiﬁc and technical.” While the bioethicists wax eloquent about supposedlycompromised human individual uniqueness or excessive control of natu-ral processes, the scene of ontological reshaping mutates once again undertheir feet, leaving ethical inquiry to play catch-up with odd abstractionsand bio-think-tank scenarios.Hogness had trouble convincing editors and producers up the linein The DNA Filesthat the crucial ethical issues now in human cloning arethe biological matters. In a very short program in which even the rudimentsof the biological techniques and developmental and genetic pro cessescould barely be sketched, he was repeatedly asked to interview “a bioethi-cist.” Society was on one side; science, on the other. But the biologistsCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd137




wanted to savor a mutated metaphor that let them stress what is reallyat stake in processes such as nuclear reprogramming in cloning, becausethat is where many of the conditions for ﬂourishing lie. The ethics is inthe whole ontological apparatus, in the thick complexity, in the nature-cultures of being in technoculture that join cells and people in a danceof becoming.One of the scientists whom Hogness interviewed was Ian Wilmut,who led the eﬀort to clone Dolly the sheep at the Roslin Institute. Refer-ring obliquely to the misplaced concreteness of much bioethical handwringing, he said, “It does strike me as the supreme irony which escapessome people that one of the reasons they’re suggesting for copying peopleis to bring back a dead child. And one of the most likely outcomes of theircloning exercise is another dead child.”6Whether or not developmentallydamaged sheep should be given similar consideration is a separate, butnot empty, question, partly addressed by turning to those banes of livingmutton, namely dogs, themselves subjects of an infamous pet-cloningexperiment, the Missyplicity Project, which took oﬀin with a $.million private grant to researchers at Texas A&M University, the largestgrant by far ever to be given in the area of canine physiology. The belovedmutt Missy herself died in , the year the project moved from univer-sity–corporate collaboration to an entirely corporate ecology in order todevelop the “high-throughput technology that only industrial partnershipscan oﬀer.”7Despite success in cloning two very pricey cats (in the rangeof ﬁfty thousand dollars) for the pet market, the whole eﬀort crashed inwhen Genetic Savings and Clone, Inc., went out of business andsold its frozen cells and gametes to an agricultural animal biotech ﬁrm,ViaGen, which had no plans to develop commercially cloned dogs.The kennel has whelped fewer bioethicists than the nursery, butdog worlds also stand in acute need of a diﬀerent ethical inquiry, onethat is at the heart of the action that births emergent species, emergentkinds. As any feminist knows who has survived the biopolitical warswaged about structures and relationships below the diaphragm in humanfemale bodies, “reproduction” is a potent matter. The symbolic load onreproduc tion in Western philosophy, medicine, and culture at large hasrequired tomes from the most talented anthropological theorists amongus.8Even partly relocating this power from (properly impregnated and138dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




in situ) wombs (of the same species as the being-to-be) to laboratories,clinics, embryos in freezers, stem cell collections, surrogate wombs ofanomalous kinds, and genome databases has undergirded industries ofacademic pronouncements, commercial boosterism, and bioethical angst.Where reproduction is at stake, kin and kind are torqued; biographiesand systems of classiﬁcation, warped. “Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers”twists inside these symbolic and material forces. Both cloning and geneticdiversity discourses are in the warp ﬁeld of reproduction enterprised up.Getting inside the apparatus of the production/reproduction of dogsin technoculture starts with the rich communities of breeders and healthactivists in purebred dog worlds. I will not here address purebred puppymill producers, backyard breeders, or many other worlds of dog prac-tice, which a wider analysis would require. Instead, I want to begin witha small community of dog breeders who taught me more about respectthan about critique, so that I can anchor my anger with the pet-cloningextravaganza with which I end this chapter. Since the beginning of mod-ern “purebred” dog breeds linked to kennel clubs in the last third of thenineteenth century, controversy about the health of dogs and ethical breed-ing practices has raged. As Foucault taught us for the birth of the clinic,the birth of the kennel had all the constitutive discourses in place fromthe ﬁrst appearance of the formation.9Two points need to be highlighted at the outset: () Responsibledog breeding is a cottage industry, made up largely of amateur communi-ties and individuals who are not scientiﬁc or medical professionals andwho breed modest numbers of dogs at considerable cost to themselvesover many years and with impressive dedication and passion. I am ex-cluding from my category of responsible dog breeders many of the largerkennels breeding to win in conformation competitions, partly because Ihave no ﬁrsthand ethnographic research on which to draw. Even more,I withhold attention here because what I think I know from both oraldog culture and published scholarly work makes me predictably critical,and I have nothing new to add to the well-worn arguments. I want tostart somewhere that gives me an ethical, emotional, and analytical com-pass; it is a methodological principle for me. My small breeder worldsare not utopian communities, far from it; but the people I have met inmy ﬁeldwork, who are trying to do what they call ethical dog breeding,CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd139




have earned my respect. () “Lay” people who breed dogs are often solidlyknowledgeable about science, technology, and veterinary medicine, oftenself-educated, and often eﬀective actors in technoculture for the ﬂourish-ing of dogs and their humans.The eﬀorts of Linda Weisser and Catherine de la Cruz, U.S. WestCoast breeders of Great Pyrenees livestock guardian dogs as well as healthactivists, to reshape the habits of Pyr breeders in dealing with canine hipdysplasia are a good example of this technosavvy and its biological andethical demands.10Weisser insists that the moral center of dog breedingis the breed, that is, the dogs themselves, as both a specialized kind andas irreducible individuals, to whom all the participants in Pyr worlds havean obligation. The obligation is to work so that the dogs and their peopleﬂourish over as long a time as possible. Hers is an “other-centered” ethicsof a resolutely antiromantic sort that despises both anthropomorphismand anthropocentrism as a framework for practicing “love of the breed.”Both respected elders in the breed, Weisser and de la Cruz haveencyclopedic knowledge of Pyr history and pedigrees over many decades;they are immersed in a cross-species kinship network of epic propor-tions. Listening to them talk about Pyr history requires learning idiomsof dog form and function, layered national histories, functional and dys-functional institutions, and human heroes and villains. They have enteredthousands of individual Pyr pedigrees, some going back more than twentygenerations, into computerized pedigree programs, which they carefullyresearched for their robustness for their purposes. A tremendous amountof what they know is personal and community knowledge—face-to-face,human-to-dog, and dog-to-dog—in the showing, ordinary living, andworking ranch worlds where Great Pyrenees do their jobs. When theyplace puppies they have bred or dogs they have rescued from shelters intohomes or livestock guardian jobs, they take the people and the dogs intotheir permanent cross-species kinship web. Membership in that web en -tails concrete demands, all of which are part of “love of the breed.”One of those demands is to breed only those animals who canimprove the breed, that is, those who can contribute to the ﬂourishingof Great Pyrenees. Even remembering that “improvement” is one of themost important modernizing and imperializing discourses, I cannot bedismissive of these commitments. What counts as improving the breed in140dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




dogland is controversial, to say the least. But since the founding in ofthe Orthopedic Foundation for Animals as a closed registry and voluntarydiagnostic service addressing the problem of canine hip dysplasia, stan-dards of good breeding practice require at least X-raying potential matesfor the soundness of their hips. However, this practice, even coupled withconscientious breeders’ mating only dogs whose hips are rated good or ex -cellent by OFA, could not seriously reduce the incidence of this complexgenetic and developmental condition for two reasons. First, the registrywas voluntary and closed; that is, breeders could not get the record ofproblems in someone else’s dogs, and breeders with a questionable dogdid not (and do not) have to get an X-ray to be able to register that dog’soﬀspring with the American Kennel Club or other registry. Second andjust as bad, if only potential mates were X-rayed and archived, the rest ofthe relatives (littermates, aunts and uncles, etc.) went unrecorded. Peoplelike Weisser and de la Cruz argued that open registries with completepedigrees and fully disclosed health records for as many relatives as pos-sible, all accessible to the community of practice, are needed. That is whatbiological, technical, and ethical “love of the breed” requires.11How could a community be led to a better practice, especially whensomething like full disclosure of genetic problems could lead to terriblecriticism and even ostracism by those with too much to hide or just thosewho don’t know any better? First, an open registry in the United Statesfor canine genetic diseases came on the scene in .12The Institute forGenetic Disease Control in Animals (GDC), founded at the Universityof California at Davis vet school, was modeled after the Swedish KennelClub’s open registry. The GDC tracked several orthopedic and soft tissuediseases. Listing suspected carriers and aﬀected animals and maintainingbreed-speciﬁc registries and research databases as well as all-breed regis -tries, the GDC issued the KinReport™ to individuals with a valid reasonfor inquiring. However, by the GDC faced a problem that threat-ened to end the service: too few dog people used its registry, and theinstitute was in ﬁnancial trouble. In , in coalition with progressivebreeders and breed groups, the GDC launched a major eﬀort to developa grassroots advocacy program to support the institute’s work. It neededﬁve thousand breeders and owners to use the service and to work to pro-mote the open registry.CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd141




Weisser and de la Cruz were among the most active Great Pyreneesbreeders working to persuade their peers to use the GDC’s registry in -stead of a closed registry such as OFA’s. Biology and ethics were livedin concert in this dogland biosociality. However, what an open registryimplies made for an uphill battle. In August , de la Cruz received“quarterly reports from both OFA and GDC. Discouraging. There werePyrs listed as cleared by OFA and only threefrom GDC. . . . I wouldthink any breeder would be proud to be able to point to a product ofher breeding and say, ‘That dog is producing sounder dogs than thebreed average.’ Instead we continue to see ads for the numbers of cham-pions produced, the number of shows won. . . . I would love to hear fromother breeders. Why don’t you use the GDC?”13One of many extendeddiscussions on Pyr-L followed, along with behind-the-scenes work, inwhich de la Cruz, Weisser, and a few others educated, exhorted, andotherwise tried to make a diﬀerence for their breed. The GDC was nota technical ﬁx; it was a biologically and technologically sophisticatedwhole-dog approach that required diﬃcult changes in human practice fordog well-being.In summer , the GDC registry merged with the genetic healthdatabases of OFA, preserving breeder access to the GDC’s open data, butat a cost. All of the health data of the GDC were open; in the OFA sys-tem it was optional for a breeder or owner to allow others access to dataon a dog. Negative information stays in short supply in an optional sys-tem under current incentives in dogland. Advantages for dogs probablyprevailed in the merger. The OFA databases were much larger and hadstable ﬁnancing and wide use. Breeder education continued on the advan-tages of an open registry for searching whole families. Further, the mergerwas coordinated with the pooled databases from many breeds of theCanine Health Information Center, the new program jointly sponsoredby OFA and the AKC’s Canine Health Foundation.Weisser and de la Cruz’s struggle for the open registry exempliﬁesthe technosavvy of“lay” dog people as they live within genetic biosociality.These women and those like them read widely, are knowledgeable aboutinternational dog cultures, take online genetics courses from a major vetschool, follow medical and veterinary literatures, support wolf reintro-duction projects and keep track of Pyrs who might protect livestock on142dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




adjoining ranches, engage broadly in conservation politics, and otherwiselive well-examined lives in technoculture. Their expertise and action areplanted in the soil of generations of particular dogs, whom they know inintimate detail, as kin and kind. What do such people do when they meetemergent demands, not only to deal with genetic disease, but also tobreed for canine genetic diversity in the context of global biodiversity sci-ence and politics?SAVING TIGERSIn spite of the long history of population genetics and its importance forthe modern theory of natural section, genetic diversity concerns remainnews—and hard-to-digest news—for most dog people. Why? Geneticculture for both professionals and nonprofessionals, especially but notonly in the United States, has been shaped by medical genetics. Humangenetic disease is the moral, technoscientiﬁc, ideological, and ﬁnancialcenter of the medical genetic universe. Typological thinking reigns almostunchecked in this universe, and nuanced views of developmental biology,behavioral ecology, and genes as nodes in dynamic and multivectorial ﬁeldsof vital interactions are only some of the crash victims of high-octane med-ical genetic fuels and gene-jockey racing careers.Evolutionary biology, biosocial ecology, population biology, and pop- ulation genetics (not to mention history of science, political economy, andcultural anthropology) have played a woefully small role in shaping pub-lic and professional genetic imaginations and all too small a role in draw-ing the big money for genetic research. Canine genetic diversity researchreceived very little funding up to about and the explosion of com-parative postgenomics. Pioneer canine genetic diversity scientists wereEuropeans in the early s. Genetic diversity concerns in dog worldsdeveloped as a wavelet in the set of breakers constituting transnational,globalizing, biological, and cultural diversity discourses, in which genomesare major players. Since the s the emergence of biodiversity discourses,environmentalisms, and sustainability doctrines of every political coloron the agendas of non-governmental organizations and institutions suchas the World Bank, the International Union for the Conservation ofNature and Natural Resources, and the Organization for EconomicCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd143




Cooperation and Development has been crucial.14The notoriously prob-lematicpolitics and the naturalcultural complexity of diversity discoursesrequire a shelf of books, some of which have been written. I am compelledby the irreduciblecomplexity—morally, politically, culturally, and scien-tiﬁcally—of diversity discourses, including those leashed to the genomesand gene pools of purebred dogs and their canine relatives in and out ofwhat counts as “nature.”The last few paragraphs are preparation for logging on to the CanineDiversity Project Web site, owned by Dr. John Armstrong, a lover of stan-dard and miniature poodles and a faculty member in the Department ofBiology at the University of Ottawa, until his death on August , .15Armstrong widely distributed his analyses of the eﬀects that a popularsire and a particular kennel have had on standard poodles. Also, as theowner of the Listserv CANGEN-L, Armstrong conducted collaborativeresearch with dog health and genetics activists to study whether longevityis correlated to the degree of inbreeding. Their conclusion: It is. Aimingin the introductory sentence to draw the attention of dog breeders to “thedangers of inbreeding and the overuse of popular sires,” the DiversityProject Web site started in . Used by at least several hundred dogpeople of many nationalities, from January to June the site reg-istered over thirty thousand logons.Linda Weisser was a frequent visitor and vociferous advocate of thisWeb site in –, but she was not a true believer in all the posi-tions advocated by the population biologists on CANGEN-L. Open tochange, she evaluated the diversity discourses in light of her hands-onexperience in her breed over several decades. Along with Weisser andother dog people, I have learned a tremendous amount from the Web site.I still appreciate the quality of information, the controversies engaged, thecare for dogs and people, the range of material, and the commitments toissues. I remain acutely alert professionally to the semiotics—the meaning-making machinery—of the Canine Diversity Project Web site. Some ofthat rhetorical machinery caused allergies in people like Weisser in theperiod around .Animated by a mission, the site still draws its users into its re-form agenda. Some of the rhetorical devices are classical American tropesrooted in popular self-help practices and evangelical Protestant witness,144dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




devices so ingrained in U.S. culture that few users would be conscious oftheir history. For example, right after the introductory paragraph withthe initial link terms, the Diversity Project Web site leads its users into asection called “How You Can Help.” The heading works on the readermuch like questions in advertising and preaching: Have you been saved?Have you taken the Immune Power pledge? (The latter is a slogan froman ad for a vitamin formulation in the s.) Or, as the Diversity Proj-ect put the query, “Ask the Question—Do you need a ‘Breed SurvivalPlan?’”This is the stuﬀof subject-reconstituting, conversion and convic-tion discourse.16The ﬁrst four highlighted linkage terms in the opening paragraphsof the Web site are popular sires,for many years a common term in pure-bred dog talk about the overuse of certain stud dogs and the consequentspreading of genetic disease; Species Survival Plans,a term that serves as anew link for dog breeders to zoos and the preservation of endangeredspecies; wild cousins,which places dogs with their taxonomic kin andreinforces the consideration of purebreds within the family of natural (inthe sense of “wild”) and frequently endangered species; and inherited dis-ease,in last place on the list and of concern primarily because a high inci-dence of double autosomal recessives for particular diseases is an index oflots of homozygosity in purebred dog genomes. Such high incidences ofdouble recessives are related to excessive in- and linebreeding, and espe-cially to overuse of popular sires, all of which are diversity-depleting prac-tices. The soul of the Web site, however, is diversity itselfin the semioticframework of evolutionary biology, biodiversity, and biophilia, notdiver-sity as an instrument for solving the problem of genetic disease. In thatsense, “breeds” become like endangered species, inviting the apparatus ofapocalyptic wildlife biology.Constructed as a teaching instrument, the Web site approaches itsaudience as engaged lay breeders and other committed dog people. Theseare the subjects invited to declare support for a breed survival plan.Secondarily, scientists might learn from using the site, but they are moreteachers here than researchers or students. Nonetheless, plenty of bound-ary objects link lay and professional communities of practice in theCanine Diversity Project. Further, a Web site by its nature resists reduc-tion to single purposes and dominating tropes. Links lead many places;CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd145




these paths are explored by users, within the webs that designers spin butrapidly lose control over. The Internet is hardly inﬁnitely open, but itsdegrees of semiotic freedom are many.Popular siresis well enough recognized that this linking term willappeal to most dog people open to thinking about genetic diversity. Forone thing, the link stays with dogsas the principal focus of attention anddoes not launch the user into a universe of marvelous creatures in exotichabitats whose utility as models for dogs is hard to swallow for manybreeders, even those interested in such nondog organisms and ecologiesin other contexts. Species Survival Plans,on the other hand, opens up con-troversial metaphoric and practical universes for breeders of purebred dogs,and, if such plans are taken seriously, they would require major changesin ways of thinking and acting. First, survival plansconnotes that some-thing is endangered. The line between a secular crisis and a sacred apoc-alypse is thin in U.S. discourse, where millennial matters are written intothe fabric of the national imagination, from the ﬁrst Puritan City on aHill to Star Trekand its sequelae. Second, the prominent role given tospecies survival plans on the Canine Diversity Project Web site invites areproductive tie between natural species and purebred dogs. In this mon-grelizing tie, the natural and the technical keep close company, semioti-cally and materially.To illustrate, I dwell on the material on my screen in spring after I clicked on “Species Survival Plans” and followed up with a clickon “Introduction to a Species Survival Plan.”17I was teleported to theWeb site for the Tiger Information Center, and, appreciating a face-frontphoto of two imposing tigers crossing a stream, I encountered the article“Regional and Global Management of Tigers,” by R. Tilson, K. Taylor-Holzer, and G. Brady. Lots of dog people love cats, contrary to stereo-types about folks being either canine or feline in their aﬀections. Buttigers in the world’s zoos and in shrunken “forest patches spread fromIndia across China to the Russian Far East and south to Indonesia” isaleap out of the kennel and the show ring or herding trials. I learned thatthree of the eight subspecies of tigers are extinct, a fourth is on the brink,and all the wild populations are stressed. Ideally, the goal of an SSP mas-ter blueprint for an endangered species is to create viable, managed, cap-tive populations out of existing animals in zoos and some new “founders”146dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




brought in from “nature,” to maintain as much of the genetic diversity forall the extant taxa of the species as possible. The purpose is to providea genetic reservoir for reinforcing and reconstituting wild populations.A practical SSP “because of space limitations generally targets % ofgenetic diversity of the wild populations for –years as a reason-able goal.” I recognize both the hopefulness and the despair that inhere inthat kind of reasonableness. The “Zoo Ark” for tigers has to be even moremodest, because resources are too few and needs are too great.An SSP is a trademarked complex, cooperative management pro-gram of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association (AZA), itself acontroversial organization from the point of view of people committedto the well-being of individualtigers in captivity who are enlisted in anSSP. Developing and implementing an SSP involve a long list of compan -ion species of organic, organizational, and technological kinds. A mini-mal account of these includes the World Conservation Union’s specialistgroups who make assessments of endangerment; member zoos, withtheir scientists, keepers, and boards of governors; a small managementgroup under the AZA; a database maintained as a regional studbook,using specialized software like SPARKS (single population and recordskeeping system) and its companion programs for demographic andgenetic analysis, produced by the International Species Information Sys-tem; funders; national governments; international bodies; stratiﬁed localhuman populations; and, hardly least, the ﬂesh-and-blood animals whosekind is categorically “endangered.” Crucial operations within an SSP aremeasure ments of diversity and relatedness. One wants to know founderim portance coeﬃcients (FIC) as a tool for equalizing relative foundercontributions and minimizing inbreeding. Full, accurate pedigrees areprecious objects for an SSP. Mean kinship (MK) and kinship values(KV) rule mate choice in this sociobiological system. “Reinforcing” wildspecies requires a global apparatus of technoscientiﬁc production, inwhich the natural and the technical have very high coeﬃcients of semioticand practical inbreeding.18Purebred-dog breeders also value deep pedigrees, and they are ac -customed to evaluating matings with regard to breed standards, which isa complex, unformulaic art. Inbreeding is not a new concern. So what isso challenging about an SSP as a universe of reference? The deﬁnition ofCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd147




populations and founders is perhaps ﬁrst. Discussions among engagedbreeders on CANGEN (i.e., people suﬃciently interested in questions ofgenetic diversity to sign on and post to a specialized Listserv) showed thatdog people’s terms linesand breedsare not equivalent to wildlife biologists’and geneticists’ populations.The behavior associated with these diﬀerentwords is distinct. A dog breeder educated in the traditional mentoringpractices of the fancy will attempt through line breeding, with variablefrequencies of outcrosses, to maximize the genetic or blood contributionof the truly “great dogs” who are rare and special. The great dogs are theindividuals who best embody the type of the breed. The type is not a ﬁxedthing, but a living, imaginative hope and memory. Kennels are recog-nized for the distinctiveness of their dogs, and breeders point proudly totheir kennel’s founders, and breed club documents point to the breed’sfounders. In the population geneticists’ sense, the notion of working toequalizethe contribution of allof the founders is truly odd in traditionaldog breeders’ discourse. Of course, an SSP, unlike nature and unlike dogbreeders, is notoperating with adaptational criteria of selection; the pointof an SSP is to preserve diversity as suchas a banked reservoir. Thispreservation could have doleful consequences several generations later ina program of reintroduction into demanding habitats in which geneticallystabilized details of adaptation matter.The SSP is a conservation management plan, not nature, howeverconceptualized, and not a breed’s written standard or a breeder’s inter-pretation of that standard. Like an SSP, a breed standard is also a large-scale action blueprint, but for purposes other than genetic diversity. Somebreeders talk of those purposes in capital letters, as the Original Purposeof a breed. Other breeders are not typological in that sense; they areattuned to dynamic histories and evolving goals within a partly sharedsense of breed history, structure, and function. These breeders are keenlyaware of the need for selection on the basis of criteria that are as numer-ous and holistic as possible to maintain and improve a breed’s overallquality and to achieve the rare, special dogs. They take these responsi-bilities seriously, and they are not virgins to controversy, contradiction,and failure. They are not against learning about genetic diversity in thecontext of the problems they know or suspect their dogs face. Somebreeders—a very few, I think—embrace genetic diversity discourse and148dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




population genetics. They worry that the foundation of their breedsmight be too narrow and getting narrower.But the breeder’s art does not easily entertain the adoption of themathematical and software-driven mating systems of an SSP. Severalcourageous breeders insist on deeper pedigrees and calculations of coeﬃ-cients of inbreeding, with eﬀorts to hold them down. But the breeders Imeet are loath to cede decisions to anything like a master plan. They donot categorize their own dogs or their breed primarily as biological pop-ulations. The dominance of specialists over local and lay communitiesin the SSP world does not escape dog breeders’ attention. Most of thebreeders I overhear squirm if the discussion stays on the level of theoret-ical population genetics and if few, if any, of the data come from dogsrather than from a Malagasy lemur population, a lab-bound mouse strain,or, worse still, fruit ﬂies. In short, breeders’ discourse and genetic diversitydiscourse do not hybridize smoothly, at least in the Fgeneration. Thismating is what breeders call a cold outcross, which they worry risks im -porting as many problems as it solves.There is much more to the Canine Diversity Project Web site thanthe past and current SSP links. If I had space to examine the whole Website, many more openings, repulsions, inclusions, attractions, and possi-bilities would be evident for seeing the ways dog breeders, health activists,veterinarians, and geneticists relate to the question of diversity. The seri-ous visitor to the Web site could obtain a decent elementary education ingenetics, including Mendelian, medical, and population genetics. Fasci-nating collaborations among individual scientists and breed club healthand genetics activists would emerge. The diﬀerences within dog people’sways of thinking about genetic diversity and inbreeding would be inescap -able, such as when the apocalyptic and controversial “evolving breeds” ofJeﬀrey Bragg and the Seppala Siberian sled dogs meet John Armstrong’smore modest standard poodles (and his more moderate action plan,“Genetics for Breeders: How to Produce Healthier Dogs”) or the diﬀer-ences between Leos Kral’s and C. A. Sharp’s ways of working in Aus-tralian shepherd worlds. Links would take the visitor to the extraordinaryCode of Ethics of the Coton de Tulear Club of America and this breed’salpha-male geneticist–activist, Robert Jay Russell, as well as to the onlinedocuments with which the border collie Web site teaches genetics relevantCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd149




to that talented breed. The visitor could follow links to the molecular evo-lution of the dog family, updated lists of gene tests in dogs, discussions ofwolf conservation and taxonomic debates, accounts of a cross-breeding(to a pointer) and backcross project in Dalmatians to eliminate a com-mon genetic disease and of importing new stock in African basenjis todeal with genetic dilemmas. One could click one’s way to discussionsof infertility, stress, and herpes infections or follow links to endocrine-disrupter discourse for thinking about how environmental degradationmight aﬀect dogs, as well as frogs and people, globally. Until Armstrong’sdeath, right in the middle of the Diversity Project Web site was a bold-type invitation to join the Listserv that he ran for three years, the CanineGenetics Discussion Group (CANGEN-L), on which a sometimes roughand tumble exchange among lay and scientiﬁc dog people stirred up theWeb site’s pedagogical order.So, in the active years of the Canine Diversity Project Web site’sconstruction around , dogs, not tigers—and breeds, not endangeredspecies—dominated on it. But the metaphoric, political, scientiﬁc, andpractical possibilities of those ﬁrst links to the AZA’s Species SurvivalPlan attached themselves like ticks on a nice blade of grass, waiting for apassing visitor from purebred dogland. The emergent ontologies of bio-diversity naturecultures are laced with new ethical demands. In manyways, the expertise and practices of dog breeders remain in a relation oftorque with the discourses of genetic diversity. Kin and kind mutate inthese emergent apparatuses of dog (re)production. Whether companionspecies will ﬂourish was and still is at stake.CLONING MUTTSA well-funded, media-savvy, commercially venturesome project to clonea pet mutt in a major agribusiness-linked U.S. university would seem atthe opposite end of the spectrum from the scientiﬁc and ethical practicesemergent within canine genetic diversity worlds. Yet, such cloning projectsraise similar issues: What kinds of collaborations produce the expertiseand make the decisions for the biosocial evolution of companion speciesin technocultural dogland? What constitutes an ethic of ﬂourishing andfor which members of the companion-species community? Unlike the150dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




canine open health registry debates or the genome diversity discourses,the initial world of pet dog cloning was a surreal mix of state-of-the-artreproductive technoscience, inventive ethics, New Age epistemologicalpranksterism, and marketing extravagance.19The Missyplicity Project began in with a $.million grantfor the ﬁrst two years, from a wealthy donor, initially anonymous, to threesenior researchers at Texas A&M University and their collaborators fromseveral institutions. The project had an elaborate Web site in , withcomments from the public; stories about the mixed-breed dog, Missy,who was to be cloned; a list of research objectives; an account of homeadoption and dog-training programs for the surrogate bitches used in theresearch (“All of our dogs have been trained using only positive reinforce-ment through clicker training”); and a state-of-the-art code of bioethics.20Marketing was never far from the pet dog–cloning project, andadvertising provided an easy, if cheap, window to the trading ﬂoor in cul-tural futures in dog geneticism. In advance of the ability to clone a dog,Animal Cloning Sciences, Inc. (ANCL), made a claim, presenting it overa picture of an elderly white woman holding her beloved terrier: “You nolonger have to look forward to heart-rending grief at the death of yourpet. If you preserve your pet’s DNA now, you will have the option to cloneyour pet and continue your pet’s life in a new body.”21Alien-identity-transfer experiments were never so successful, even on X-Files.Promisingcloning technology for companion animals “soon,” ANCL oﬀered cryo -preservation of cells in at $.In a DogWorldad, another company oﬀering cell cryopreservation,Lazaron BioTechnologies, started by two embryologists and a businessassociate at the Louisiana Business and Technology Center, on the cam-pus of Louisiana State University, urged readers to take tissue samplesfrom their dogs before it is too late, so that they might “save a geneticlife.” This was something of an escalation of prolife rhetoric in the Age ofGenes™! At the top of its Web site, Lazaron described itself as “savingthe genetic life of valued animals.”22Never did value have more value, inall its kinds. Bioethics, “enterprised up,” ﬂourished here, where proﬁt metscience, conservation, art, and undying love-on-ice. Both companies dealt inagricultural and endangered species as well as companion animals, and thelink to “saving endangered species” lent a value cachet not to be despised.CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd151




We met this enhancement in dog genome diversity contexts, which becamea boundary object joining conservation and cloning discourses.Cloning dogs could have a scientiﬁc appeal for dog breeders. Prize-winning writers on canine genetics and health as well as breeders them-selves, John Cargill and Susan Thorpe-Vargas argued the merits of dogcloning to preserve genetic diversity.23They wrote that the depletion ofgenetic diversity might be mitigated if it were possible to clone desir-able dogs, rather than trying to duplicate qualities through excessive line-breeding and overuse of popular sires. Cryopreservation and cloningcould then be one tool in the eﬀort to manage the genomes of small pop-ulations in the best interests of the breed or species, they argued. In over-wrought technoculture committed to reproduction of the same, cloningseemed an easier sell in some parts of dogland than simply doing morecarefully matched outcrosses and committing to open health registries tomitigate the damage of genetic diversity depletion!High seriousness characterized the rhetoric of the Web site ofGenetic Savings and Clone, Inc., the only cryopreservation tissue and genebank in directly associated with cloning research, beginning with theMissyplicity Project. Buying out Lazaron’s interest in that year, GSC putpets, livestock, wildlife, and assistance and rescue dogs on its agenda. Thecompany’s self-perception of its part in ethical, ontological, and episte-mological emergents was grand. Large investment, best science, and aca-demic–business collaboration featured prominently; GSC did not seeitself as a “vanity” cloning and biobanking endeavor. Its bioethics statementendorsed an extraordinary collage of progressive commitments: GSCpledged itself to maximize public knowledge and keep as proprietary onlythe minimum needed for its business goals. Transgenic alterations wouldbe done only under severe scrutiny by the GSC Advisory Board. Biolog-ical weapons (ﬁgured as attack dogs!) would not be produced, nor wouldGSC’s animals enter the food chain as genetically modiﬁed organisms(GMOs). No information would be knowingly shared with those attempt-ing human cloning. GSC promised to raise its animals in “traditional,” not“factory farm,” conditions. “This means that the animals will spend part ofevery day grazing and interacting with humans and other animals—ratherthan being constantly isolated in sterile pens.”24GSC even pledged itselfto organic farming methods and to other ecologically conscious practices.152dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




So, GSC’s traditionally raised, cloned animals and surrogate moth-ers were to have plenty of organic produce in their diets. Irony had littlechance in the context of such high ethical seriousness. True, we hadto take the company’s word for everything; no public power intrudedinto this corporate idyll. Still, as the song goes, “Who could ask for any-thing more?”We did, in fact, get even more in the Missyplicity Project. Its goalsforegrounded basic knowledge of reproductive canine biology crucial torepopulating endangered species (e.g., wolves), basic knowledge of birthcontrol for feral and pet dog populations, and the replication of “speciﬁc,exceptional dogs of high societal value—especially seeing-eye and search-and-rescue dogs.”25How would they ever make a buck, one wondered?Over ten million research dollars later in the ashes of Genetic Savings andClone, Inc., in , one knew the answer.In Missyplicity’s scientiﬁc founding team was a microcosm ofcrosscutting technoscience at institutions such as Texas A&M University,a “land- sea- and space-grant institution,” with a faculty of twenty-fourhundred and a research budget of $million.26Dr. Mark Westhusin,the principal investigator, was a nuclear transfer specialist with an appoint- ment in the Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology.He had a large lab and numerous publications from cloning research onagriculturally important mammals. The embryo transfer specialist wasDr. Duane Kraemer, PhD, DVM. “He and his colleagues have transferredembryos in more diﬀerent species than any other group in the world.”27Kraemer was a cofounder of Project Noah’s Ark, an international eﬀortto bank the genomes of numerous wildlife species in case they becomefurther endangered or extinct. Kraemer wanted to establish mobile satel-lite labs around the world to perform needed in vitro fertilizations andcryopreservation.28Project Noah’s Ark originated in the mid-s fromTexas A&M students’ “concerns for the world’s endangered species.”29At the turn of the millennium, “saving the endangered [ﬁll in thecategory]” emerged as the rhetorical gold standard for “value” in techno-science, trumping and shunting other considerations of the apparatusfor shaping public and private, kin and kind, animation and cessation.“Endangered species” turned out to be a capacious ethical bypass forontologically heterogeneous traﬃc in dogland.CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd153




Where better could “Cloning Mutts” conclude than at a solemnpublic program sponsored by Stanford University’s Ethics in Society Pro-gram? On May , , Lou Hawthorne, CEO of GSC and projectcoordinator of Missyplicity, spoke on the panel “The Ethics of CloningCompanion Animals.”30Also on the panel were two Stanford philosophyprofessors, a professor of theology and ethics at the Paciﬁc School ofReligion, and Lazaron chief executive, Richard Denniston, who wasdirector of the Louisiana State University Embryology BiotechnologyLaboratory. In the questions after the formal presentations, someoneasked how the Missyplicity Project, with its mongrel subject, aﬀectedpurebred dog breeders. Reaching for the gold standard, Denniston calledmutts “an endangered species of one”! Hawthorne more modestly saidthat GSC was a “celebration of the mutt,” since these one-of-a-kindpooches could not be bred to type.A talented polemicist and media expert, Hawthorne was a conﬁ-dence man in the American traditions so well understood by HermanMelville, P. T. Barnum, and New Age savants. Hawthorne was also athoughtful and complex actor in cross-species technoscience. A tricksteror conﬁdence man tests the goodness of reasoning and valuing, perhaps154dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS

J. P. Rini, from CartoonBank.com. Copyright The New Yorkercollection, 1997. All rightsreserved.




showing up the baseness of what passes for gold in oﬃcial knowledges, orat least tweaking the certainties of the pious, those “for” or “against” atechnoscientiﬁc marvel. A conﬁdence man in twenty-ﬁrst-century Amer-ica would also like to make some money, preferably lots of it, while savingthe earth. Science studies scholar Joseph Dumit sees such ﬁgures to beengaged seriously with “playful truths.”31Not innocent truths; play is notinnocent. Play can open up degrees of freedom in what was ﬁxed. But lossof ﬁxity is not the same thing as opening new possibilities for ﬂourish-ing among companion species. I read Hawthorne as a master player intechnoscience, whose not inconsiderable earnestness is overmatched byhis trickster savvy.At Stanford, Hawthorne staged his discussion of the MissyplicityProject’s Code of Ethics with an origin story and travel narrative. He beganas a Silicon Valley media and technology consultant with no knowledgeof biotechnology or bioethics. In July his “rich and anonymous client”asked him to explore the feasibility of cloning his aging mutt. This studyled to many and marvelous places in biotechnology land, including theconference Transgenic Animals in Agriculture in August in Tahoe.There Hawthorne heard about animals as “bioreactors,” which could bemanipulated without moral limit. He emerged “with two epiphanies”:() Missyplicity would need a strong Code of Bioethics, “if just to dis-tance ourselves from the giddy, anything-goes attitude of most bioengi-neers,” in the words of the preprint; and () his lack of scientiﬁc trainingmight be an advantage.Like many seekers in the West, Hawthorne arrived in the East.Returning to his experience of ﬁlming a documentary on Zen in , heretrieved“a core value of Buddhism—borrowed from Hinduism—ahimsa,commonly translated as ‘non-harming.’ Ahimsa,like most Buddhist ideas,is a koan, or puzzle without clear-cut solution, which can only be fullyresolved through a process of personal inquiry. . . . I decided to put non-harming at the top of the Missyplicity Bioethics Code.”32His search, hebelieved, led to a way to live responsibly in emergent technocultural worlds,where kin and kind are unﬁxed.Hawthorne’s explication of the code revealed a wonderful collage oftransactional psychology (all the partners—humans and dogs—shouldbeneﬁt); Buddhist borrowings; family values (“at the completion of theirCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd155




role in the Missyplicity Project, all dogs should be placed in loving homes”);no-kill animal shelter policies; and birth control discourse (“how manydogs could we save from death—by preventing their births in the ﬁrstplace—through the development of an eﬀective canine contraceptive?”).If Margaret Sanger had been a dog activist, she would have been proud ofher progeny. Animal rights, disability rights, and right-to-life discourseshad echoes in the Missyplicity Code—with practical consequences forhow the canine research subjects were treated, that is, as subjects, notobjects. No matter how many trips are made to the East, in its soul West-ern ethics is riveted to rights discourses. In any case, if I were a researchdog, I’d have wanted to be at Texas A&M and GSC in the MissyplicityProject, where the Zen of Cloning was more than a slogan. Besides, thatis where “best science” lay. As Hawthorne noted, cloning dogs is harderthan cloning humans. Missyplicity was against cloning those bipeds any-way, and as a reward, Missy’s hominid companion species was able to domore leading-edge research.The clincher in Hawthorne’s savvy presentation at Stanford, wheremaking money has never been a stranger to producing knowledge, washis introduction of Genetic Savings and Clone, Inc., “which is based inCollege Station, Texas, but [which] also heavily leverages the internet.”Distributed networking was not limited to neural nets and activists. GSC“represents the ﬁrst step toward commercializing the enormous amountof information being generated by Missyplicity.” There was a backlog ofdemand for private cloning services. Hawthorne speculated that the priceof cloning a pet dog (or cat—a project that succeeded in ) would “fallwithin three years to under $,—though at ﬁrst it may be ten timesas much.”Not surprisingly, these ﬁgures led Hawthorne to great works of art,those conserved, one-of-a-kind creations. “I’d like to end with this thought:great companion animals are like works of art. . . . Once we’ve identiﬁedthese masterpieces, then arguably it’s not just reasonable but imperativethat we capture their unique genetic endowments before they’re gone—just as we would rescue great works of art from a burning museum.”“Unique genetic endowments” become like “vanishing indigenes”—need-ing the kind of “saving” that comes so easily in white settler colonies.In addition to saving a genetic life, this Zen bioethics seems to demand156dCLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERS




saving genetic art. Science, business, ethics, and art are the familiar renais-sance partners at the origin of technopresence, where “evolution meets thefree market; those who can aﬀord it will save what they like and leave therest to burn.” That sounds like the play of scary, Peter Pan–like CEOs.Even as he mobilized the resources for bringing cloned dogs into theworld, Hawthorne “playfully” tweaked oﬃcial truths in his well-funded,trickster boosterism in the “Museum of Mutts.”At the end of“Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers” I return to the home-lier metaphors of Linda Weisser and her less dazzling work to persuadePyr people to use an open health and genetics registry and to try to whelponly dogs who can improve the breed, helping the kin and kind of com-panion species to ﬂourish. Immersed in emergences of many kinds, I sawvalue in aspects of the Missyplicity Project—without that ﬁre at the endof things. I am deﬁnitely on the side of endangered tigers, as well as thepeople who inhabit the nations where the big cats (barely) live. Geneticdiversity is a precious pattern for dogs as well as people, and cats arelikedogs. The crucial issues remain, as always, attending to the details. Whomakes decisions? What is the apparatus of production of these new sortsof being? Who ﬂourishes, and who does not, and how? How can westay on Linda Weisser’s science-savvy riverbank without choking on thefog of the technopresent? If “saving the endangered [ﬁll in the blank]”means personally and collectively cleaning the rivers so that the earth’salways emergent kin can drink without harm or shame, who could askfor anything more?CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSd157




This page intentionally left blank 




II. NOTES OF A SPORTSWRITER’SDAUGHTER




This page intentionally left blank 




6. ABLE BODIES ANDCOMPANION SPECIESNovember , Dear Dad,Your retirement from the Denver Posthas beenpresent to me for weeks now. I want to write to youabout what your work has meant to me since I was a smallgirl. I tell all the people who are important to me, “Myfather is a sportswriter. He loves his work. He is good at it,and he passed on to me the center of my feeling about workas a way of living at least as much as making a living.” Yourpleasure in words has been central to your work. I saw youenjoywords. You showed your children words as tools tosculpt fuller lives. I read your stories for years, and I learneda daily, reliable craft to tell important stories. Your worktaught me that “writing a story” is a very ﬁne way to “makea living.” I saw you consistently insist on writing aboutthe parts of people you could aﬃrm, not because youhid sordid things, but because you allowed peopletheir beauty. I think that is why you loved the




game story best. I saw you chronicle dramas, rituals, feats,skills, mindful bodies in motion. In sportswriting, youpenned stories that made living bigger, expansive, generous.I remember going to the old Denver Bears Stadium inthe s when Bill and the other boys were bat and ballboys. I regretted not being able to bea bat boy in the sameway I regretted not being able to bea Jesuit, so I heard mydolls’ confessions in my closet with the sliding doors and saidMass for them on my dresser. I have changed since then froma junior Catholic theologian to a much less innocent feministscribbler, from a parochial school basketball forward, to awriter of her own game stories. You gave me the same skillsyou gave my brothers, Bill and Rick. You taught us all toscore about the same time we learned to read.1That night inwhen you and the Rocky Mountain Newsscribe ChetNelson asked me how I had scored a contested baseball playon which you couldn’t agree, and then used my scoring, yougave me something precious: you recognized me in yourwork. You gave me your regard.My father is a sportswriter.With love,DonnaBodies in the making, indeed. This chapter is a note of a sportswriter’sdaughter. It is writing that I must do, because it’s about a legacy, an in-heritance in the ﬂesh. To come to accept the body’s unmaking, I need tore-member its becoming. I need to recognize all the members, animateand inanimate, that make up the knot of a particular life, my father, FrankOutten Haraway’s life.My husband, Rusten, and I have been privileged to accompany ouraging parents in the last months and years of their lives. On September, , my brothers and I held my father while he died, alert and pres-ent, in our hands. We held him during the process of his no longer beingthere. This was not a process uniquely of his no longer being present as asoul, or a mind, or a person, or an interior, or a subject. No, as his body162dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




cooled, his bodywas no longer there. The corpse is not the body. Rather,the body is always in-the-making; it is always a vital entanglement ofheterogeneous scales, times, and kinds of beings webbed into ﬂeshly pres-ence, always a becoming, always constituted in relating. The corpse’s con-signment to the earth as ashes is, I think, a recognition that, in death, it isnot simply the person or the soul who goes. That knotted thing we callthe body has left; it is undone. My father is undone, and that is why Imust re-member him. I and all those who lived entangled with him becomehis ﬂesh; we are kin to the dead because their bodies have touched us. Thebody of my father is the body that I knew as his daughter. I inherit in theﬂesh, in material troping, tripping, that joins text and body in what I callmaterial semiosis and semiotic materiality.Mine is a looping set of stories of the generations; my story is aboutinheriting the craft of writing looping, braided stories, stories of the game.Born in , my father was a sportswriter for the Denver Postfor forty-four years. After retiring from the paper in , he continued to work inthe Denver sports world, as the baseball oﬃcial scorer for the NationalLeague for the Colorado Rockies and as part of the statistics crews forDenver Nuggets basketball and Broncos football. His last working gamewas in September , when he was eighty-seven years old. Writing hisown epitaph, he lived and died as a sportswriter, or as he put it, as a fanwho got paid to do what he loved.I try to be something of a sportswoman; we will come back to that.In the university, I too am paid to do what I love. In this chapter, I writeabout the inheritance of being a journalist’s daughter, a sportswriter’sdaughter, about my eﬀort to gain the father’s regard, to gain his approval,to somehow have his writing be about my sport, my game. I write out ofa child’s need in order to honor an ongoing adult love.I’m a heterosexual daughter, more or less, of a relentlessly heterosex -ual father, a girl child who never had her father’s heterosexual gaze. Hiswas a deliberate withholding of the gaze of potential incest, I now think.I both loathed and envied his gender-conventional sexualization of otherwomen and girls. My husband’s sister Suze and I talk together aboutour fathers, who could not look at their daughters as beautiful physicallybecause they dared not. But I had my father’s regard in another, life-giving, bodily way: I had his respect. This is a diﬀerent specular economyABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd163




of generational passage, no less corporeal and no less full of desire andlure, no less leery of the law, no less in the game, but in an economy thatleads the daughter to remember in joy and grief. This kind of look hasmade my body what it is in life as a writer and as a woman playing a sport.I want to take us, take me, through part of this legacy.Consider “regard” and “respect” a bit longer. I am drawn by the tonesof this kind of active looking at/regard (both as verb, respecere,and asrespectus) that I sought and experienced with and from my father.2Thespeciﬁc relationality in this kind of regard holds my attention: to haveregard for, to see diﬀerently, to esteem, to look back, to hold in regard, tohold in seeing, to be touched by another’s regard, to heed, to take careof. This kind of regard aims to release and be released in oxymoronic,necessary, autonomy-in-relation. Autonomy as the fruit of and insiderelation. Autonomy as trans-acting. Quite the opposite of the gaze/lookusually studied in cultural theory! And certainly not the fruit of the gazeof incest.In recent speaking and writing on companion species, I have tried tolive inside the many tones of regard/respect/seeing each other/lookingback at/meeting/optic–haptic encounter. Species and respect are in optic/haptic/aﬀective/cognitive touch: they are at table together; they are mess-mates, companions, in company, cum panis.I also love the oxymoron in -herent in “species”—always both logical type and relentlessly particular,always tied to specereand yearning/looking toward respecere. “Species”includes animal and human as categories, and much more besides; and wewould be ill advised to assume which categories are in play and shapingone another in ﬂesh and logic in constitutive encounterings.In all those senses, I see the regard I am trying to think and feel aspart of something not proper to either humanism or posthumanism. Com- panion species—coshapings all the way down, in all sorts of temporalitiesand corporealities—is my awkward term for a not-humanism in whichspecies of all sorts are in question. For me, even when we speak only ofpeople, the animal/human/living/nonliving category separations fray in -side the kind of encountering worthy of regard. The ethical regard that Iam trying to speak and write can be experienced across many sorts ofspecies diﬀerences.3The lovely part is that we can know only by lookingand by looking back. Respecere.164dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




For the last few years, I have been writing under the sign of com-panion species, perhaps partly to tweak my colleagues’ sense of properspecies behavior. They have been remarkably patient; indeed, they under-stand that “companion species” does not mean smallish animals treatedlike indulged children-in-fur-coats (or in ﬁns or feathers) in late imperialsocieties. Companion species is a permanently undecidable category, acategory-in-question that insists on the relation as the smallest unit ofbeing and of analysis. By species I mean, with thanks to Karen Barad’s the-ory of agential realism and intra-action, a kind of intra-ontics/intra-anticsthat does not predetermine the status of the species as artifact, machine,landscape, organism, or human being.4Singular and plural, species reso -nate with the tones of logical types, of the relentlessly speciﬁc, of stampedcoin, of the real presence in the Catholic Eucharist, of Darwinian kinds,of sf aliens, and of much else. Species, like the body, are internally oxy-moronic, full of their own others, full of messmates, of companions.Every species is a multispecies crowd. Human exceptionalism iswhat companion species cannot abide. In the face of companion species,human exceptionalism shows itself to be the specter that damns thebody to illusion, to reproduction of the same, to incest, and so makes re-membering impossible. Under the material–semiotic sign of companionspecies, I am interested in the ontics and antics of signiﬁcant otherness,in the ongoing making of the partners through the making itself, in themaking of bodied lives in the game. Partners do not preexist their relating;the partners are precisely what come out of the inter- and intra-relatingof ﬂeshly, signiﬁcant, semiotic–material being. This is the ontological cho-reography that Charis Thompson writes about.5I’m telling a loopingstory of ﬁguration, of ontics, of bodies in the making, of play in which allthe messmates are not human.Indeed, perhaps this is the daughter’s knowledge, which is madepossible by the kind of regard/respect her father gave—the knowledgethat we have never been human and so are not caught in that cyclopeantrap of mind and matter, action and passion, actor and instrument. Becausewe have never been the philosopher’s human, we are bodies in braided,ontic, and antic relatings.And so, we write the game story. In this account, the messmateswith my father—the constitutive companion species knots that get myABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd165




attention—are not myself or any other organism, but a pair of crutchesand two wheelchairs. These were his partners in the game of living well.When he was sixteen months old, my father fell and injured his hip.Tuberculosis set in. It subsided, only to return with a vengeance in ,when he slipped on an oiled ﬂoor. Tuberculosis lodged in the upper leg,knee, and hip bones, in a period when there was no treatment. We get thisversion of the history of the body from a tenth-grade school assignment,“The Autobiography of Frank Haraway,” which we found after Dad’s deathin his orderly, but still packrat-inspired, ﬁles.6His own father had movedto Colorado Springs from Tennessee and Mississippi (the state line actu-ally ran through the family house) in order to heal from pulmonary tuber-culosis in a Rocky Mountain spa town that makes me recall The MagicMountain.My father’s childhood tuberculosis meant that from an early agehe could not move without excruciating pain. He spent the ages of eightto about eleven in bed in a full-length body cast from his chest to his knees,not able to attend school and so learning with a private tutor. Not expectedto live, he nonetheless eventually healed. But, the hip joints were perma-nently calciﬁed, and he was left rigid with no plane of motion, no abilityto bend, from the hips. He could not separate his legs in any direction.(This fact made me curious in my adolescent years about how my parentspulled oﬀfeats of conception—ordinary epistemophilia, with a twist.There was more than a little joking in our house about these matters.)My father’s father had money until a few years into the Depression.My grandfather was a sports promoter as well as the owner of PigglyWiggly grocery stores in Colorado. A businessman and community ﬁg-ure, he brought sports ﬁgures to Denver such as Babe Ruth and LouGehrig, who came to Dad’s house and signed a baseball for him whilehe was still conﬁned to bed. My grandfather and his industrialist col-leagues founded the white men’s basketball leagues that preceded profes-sional basketball as we now know it. The players for BF Goodrich, AkronGoodyear, Piggly Wiggly, and other midwestern and western industrialbasketball teams were all white men destined to be middle-level man-agers. The bodily practices of racialization come in many forms, not leastthe braiding of family, sports, and business. My father was a sportswriter;that is part of how I am white; it is part of the game story. Race andmoney are part of how my father became a sportswriter.166dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




My grandfather gave Dad a wheelchair as soon as he was able to getout of his bed and body cast, so he could go to the old Merchant’s Parkand watch the ballgames. But he was not just a spectator. From his wheel-chair, in his typical semirecumbent seated posture dictated by his un-accommodating hips, Dad played baseball in the neighborhood. I have apicture of him and his younger brother, Jack, at about twelve and thirteenyears old, both wearing characteristic pajama-mimic baseball pants, clutch-ing bottles of Coke. Dad is in his wheelchair, ﬂashing his trademark,gap-toothed smile, which showed up years later in the sports page car-toons drawn by Bob Bowie at the beginning of baseball spring training.Another photo shows my pimply-faced father swinging the bat withrather elegant athletic form. Dad was known in the neighborhood, I amtold, as a good player, or at least a popular one. That wheelchair was in acompanion-species relation to the boy; the whole body was organic ﬂeshas well as wood and metal; the player was on wheels, grinning. Yet, per-haps not always grinning. At the end of a neighborhood game, so thefamily story goes, when their ancient baseball fell apart deﬁnitively andfor the last time, the other kids persuaded Dad to bring out his BabeRuth–Lou Gehrig autographed treasure. Sure, Dad thought, we onlyhave one out to go. Dad watched the batter hit the ball past the ﬁelder’soutreached glove. The ball rolled down the urban gutter into the sewers,where it continues to fertilize narratives of loss and nostalgia—and nar-ratives of the dramatic plays in a game.When he graduated from Randall, the private high school he at -tended in his wheelchair, Dad got his crutches and galloped oﬀto DenverUniversity, where he became student sports editor of the DU Clarion. Histrack career at DU was cut short after an unauthorized race with a broken-legged football player, who was temporarily locomoting with crutches, arace that was set up by the other athletes on the track around the footballﬁeld, starting gun and all. With his trusty cherrywood crutches under hisarmpits, swinging in long arcs, my father won the race handily, but hisopponent fell and broke his other leg, prompting the coach to warn Dadoﬀany further competitive exploits. These crutches belong corporeally ina life built out of relational, enabling objectiﬁcations, of coming into beingthrough meldings with the physicality of the wheelchair, the bed, the cast,the crutches, all of which produced a vital, living, achieving sportswriter.ABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd167




Bob Bowie’s Denver Postcartoon of Frank Haraway arriving for Bears baseball springtraining in the 1950s. From Haraway family archives.




Aided by his crutches, Dad developed a sense of balance that sus-tained him without the “sticks,” as he called them, while standing andtaking tiny steps using his partly ﬂexible knees. That way, with unreturn-able serves—in later years, mostly made illegal—and enviable timing, hewon three straight Colorado State Table Tennis Championships in thes.7If you’ve ever watched table tennis, you know it’s a sport thatrequires covering a lot of ground with your legs, which was exactly whatmy father could not do. He won because of hand–eye coordination, bal-ance, guts, upper-body strength, mind–body inventiveness, and desire—and because of his living in relationship to his own physicality in a waythat never for a minute considered either denial or immobility (i.e., livingoutside the body) as a viable option.To be in a companion-species relationship was the viable way of life.He was lucky to have a concatenated series of partners, including thewheelchair, the crutches, and the attention and resources of his parentsABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd169

Frank Haraway and hisyounger brother, Jack,playing baseball about1929. From Harawayfamily archives.




Frank Haraway and other men playing wheelchair basketball during halftime at aprofessional basketball game that Haraway was covering for the Denver Postabout 1960.From Haraway family archives.Frank Haraway playing tabletennis in the 1930s. FromHaraway family archives.




and friends.8The vitality came from living with regard to all those part-ners. Another photo that spilled out of Dad’s ﬁles, one we put near hiscasket at the mortuary, eloquently makes this point. The photographercaught Dad unawares from behind in the late afternoon during battingpractice before the game. Dad is in the third-base coaching box, lookingtoward the pitcher’s mound. It’s hard to be sure, but he looks to be aboutforty years old, and he’s wearing a his typical checkered sports shirt. Atﬁrst, it just seems he’s standing relaxed on crutches in a slightly A-frameposition. Then you see that he has his knees bent at a ninety-degree angle,with the soles of his shoes facing the camera. He is standing relaxed onhis crutches all right, still and calm and utterly airborne.My father lived his adult life, with his crutches, at speed. What Iremember as a little girl was running down the block to keep up, notABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd171

Figure 17. Frank Harawaywatching batting practiceat Bears Stadium, 1960s.From Haraway familyarchives.




walking with someone less abled. Still, I need to return to walking for awhile to understand better how modifying bodies work. Early on, I noticedthat my two brothers, both my older brother, Bill, and my youngerbrother, Rick, neither of whom had hip disorders of any kind, walked alot like my father. They still do, if you know what to look for. They liter-ally embodied the gait of this man. This fact was not much remarked inthe family; after all, it was normal for sons to be like their father, wasn’tit? Theirs was a mimetic looping through the storied, masculine bodiesof fathers and sons, which at no point was regarded as mimicking dis-ability or any sort of oddity. The term disabilitydidn’t enter the family, notbecause there was denial about the need for crutches, but because theseobjects were normal parts of paternal equipment, all meanings intended.Certainly, they were part of the reproductive apparatus that shaped thebodies of my brothers.This shared gait was about coming into cognizance of, in regard to,our father’s body in a life-shaping way. In a sense, Dad’s crutches sym-biotically infused the bodies of all the family. My brothers and I would,naturally, borrow his crutches to try them out and see how fast we couldgo. We all did things like that, but only my brothers literally walked myfather’s walk. I did not have my father’s gait; I had his way with language.My brothers did too, actually—Bill, as a ﬁnancial adviser, in the idiomand lineage of our businessman grandfather; and Rick, as a social workerand peace and justice worker, in the vulgate of our mother, DorothyMaguire, which was inﬂuenced by her Catholic formation and in whichwhat later came to be called the “preference for the poor” was both doc-trine and life-aﬃrming bread. Trembling when she had to give her much-practiced treasurer’s reports to the PTA, Mom shunned verbal publicperformance, but she knew the word was made ﬂesh in taking people’sneeds and pain to her own heart. Laughing, she and I played with Latinwords when I pestered her with my worries that it might be a sin to usesacred language in an overly serious, speculative child’s fantasies. She waseloquent with good advice for me, even though I knew her own mind–body, in the vice grip of belief, was blasted by the mineﬁelds of Catholiccontradiction and unspeakable yearning in the teeth of doctrine. She hadthe more speculative, self-analytical consciousness in our family but notthe tools for expression. In she died of a heart attack, on a Monday172dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




morning in October after we had all left for school and work. I think myfather never had any idea about her entrapment, but he did know her gift.I also think the physicality through which I came into relationship withmy father, through which I won his regard, was through the sensuality ofwords and the acts of writing. We talked about, punned on, played with,and ate words for dinner; they were our food, too, even while we ate frommy mother’s mind–body, in her cooking and in her loneliness and barelyacknowledged physical vulnerability.In his eighties, Dad needed his crutches more and more for gettingaround, even in the house. Then, he started falling. He fell hard in Janu-ary and broke his hip. Because of the extensive scarifying calciﬁ-cation from the childhood tuberculosis, there was no way to use a pin, oran external stabilization device, or anything else to hold the separatedbones together so that they could heal well enough to give him half achance to walk or even stand again. So, out of bed for decades, he livedhis last eight months mostly back in bed, again in poorly relieved pain,relearning how to be mobile without legs. His bone-deep regard for peo-ple did not fail him. He ﬂirted mercilessly with the nurses, Claudia andLori, and the massage therapist, Tracy, with the same cheerful heterosex-ual self-conﬁdence that plagued my feminist soul and roused my latentenvy. He also formed gentle, trusting bonds with male caretakers—John,the blond Denver kid, and Lucky, the immigrant from Ghana—unaidedby the specular and verbal devices of ﬂirtation and across gulfs of race,class, and intimate bodily dependency. I thought the women who caredfor him became his friends in spite of, not because of, his ﬂirting; theyknew that another kind of regard was operating even more powerfully, ifless articulately. They still call my family, the men and the women call, tosee how we are doing.In the last months, Dad acquired a talented cyborg wheelchair thatwas radically diﬀerent from the s chariot I see in the old photos. Thead brochure promised everything but ﬂight. Dad developed an aﬀection-ate, joking relationship with Drew, the kind and able wheelchair sales-man. The physical therapist, Shawna, set up orange traﬃc cones in a linefor him in the hallway of the rehab center, the one we called Rocky Road,so that he could practice navigating without taking down fellow dubi-ously ambulatory residents. It didn’t take us long to up the limits on hisABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd173




liability insurance. Semi-recumbent, he had to pass Shawna’s driving testwith this chip-implanted, overachieving chair, which he never for a min -ute trusted but of which he was rather proud, even though he couldn’t getinto it or out of it on his own. This chair never quite became a belovedsigniﬁcant other. This partner was overwhelmingly about loss from whichthere would be no exit. It was a much fancier chair than the one of hisyouth, but it no longer signiﬁed getting well and going to the games. Thischair, this transaction between wary companion species, was about thepractice of dying. Even so, the chair assisted this process with compan-ions of many species, both the apparatuses and the people, in a way thatcontinued to stimulate a sportswriter’s eye for the vitality of movementin the world.The apparatus of companion species included satellite installationsand a new television set to watch the games, as well as phone calls and vis-its with friends and colleagues to continue his professional relationshipwith, and lifelong pleasure in, sports. Brother Rick and his wife, Roberta,even got him into a van and to a baseball game once, to the NationalLeague press box named for him; but it was too hard, too painful, to doagain. His partners of many species included all the means that he and wecould imagine for staying in the game as long as he could.And then he couldn’t. He came down with pneumonia and decidednot to treat it. He decided to go, because he judged that in any meaning-ful sense, he could stay in the game no longer. His game story was ﬁled.Indeed, on his desk we found a stickie with the logo of the “morning ﬁshwrapper,” that is, the Rocky Mountain News,the rival newspaper, stuck ina plastic photo cube, on which he had penciled his last game story forus to savor: “When the good Lord decides I can no longer go to the gamesI love so much, I just want to be remembered as a happy man who lovedhis family, who loved people, and as a sports fan who got paid for writingwhat he saw.” We worried for a while that we should have cremated hiscrutches with his remains; they belonged together; they were one vitalbody; both should go. Instead, Rick took the crutches home and put themin his living room, where they link us all to our ancestors, those compan-ion species in other kinds of ontic and antic time.My father was not a particularly self-reﬂective person; he didn’t the-orize these matters. As far as I could tell—and to my shame, I never tired174dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




of trying to recast him into the mold I wanted him to ﬁt, from praying forhis conversion to Catholicism when I was little to trying to get him toread books and analyze everything under the sun when I was older—hedidn’t reﬂect on these ramifying mimeses, these looping stories of mind–bodies coming to presence in the world through engaging companionspecies. I think his relationship to his work and to his life was to write thegame stories and to be inthe game. He never wanted to be a columnistor run the sports department of a big-city newspaper. He certainly neverwanted to tell the stories about the commercial, social, and political appa-ratus that makes professional sports possible. He was not reﬂective aboutwhat it might mean for a man with rigid hips to spend a good part of hisadult life whacking the bums of football players in locker rooms, thoughmy ﬁrst husband earnestly asked him about that more than once. Jaye wasgay and extremely interested in homosocial physicality of both sexual andnonsexual kinds. He kept trying to get Dad to think about what the hellwas going on and to think through his own multiple bodily relationshipswith men. These were not Dad’s ways of being. These were his children’sproblems and tasks. He was a man who wrote the game story, and stayedin the game, and whose regard as a father I have not stopped needing.Because of that need, in respect and with regard to all the players,I end this story, which has taken us through beds, casts, wheelchairs,crutches, and back to chairs, with another game story. As a woman in herﬁfties, I started playing a demanding sport with a member of another spe -cies a few years ago—with a dog, the dog of my heart, Cayenne, a Klingonwarrior princess who was bred to be a working Australian shepherd. Herspeed and athletic talent are oﬀthe scales, but her partner, if eager andﬁt, is all too weighed down with modest talent and immoderate years.The sport is called agility, a game made up of twenty or so obstacles on ahundred-foot by hundred-foot course, in patterns set out by a diaboli-cal judge, who evaluates the dog–human teams for speed and accuracy ofperformance.Playing that sport with Cayenne, now at the Masters level, afterthousands of hours of joint work and play, I recognize the looping onticsand antics, the partnerships-in-the-making that transform the bodies ofthe players in the doing itself. Agility is a team sport; both players makeeach other up in the ﬂesh. Their principal task is to learn to be in the sameABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd175




game, to learn to see each other, to move as someone new of whom nei-ther can be alone. To do that with a member of another biological speciesis not the same thing as doing it with a cheating, language-wielding, hom -inid partner. Cayenne and I must communicate throughout our being,and language in the orthodox linguist’s sense is mostly in the way. Thehighs that Cayenne and I experience come from focused, trained, respon-sive, conjoined movement at speed—from coursing together in mind–body through the patterns for the whole time, when the times in questionrange from twenty-ﬁve to ﬁfty seconds, depending on the game. Speedalone is not enough; unfocused by each other’s transforming regard, speedis chaos for us both. You can tell by all the penalties the judge assesses.The intensity that we both love is ﬁnely diﬀerentiated from the panic thatdestroys us. The “zone” for us is about speed, for sure, but speed organi-cally braided in a joint, subject-transforming dance that makes the reallygood runs “slow”; that is, we see and feel each other, see each other’s eyes,feel each other’s moving bodies. Not a wild dash, but trained regard.From the time we started training for agility competition, true tomy reforming zeal, I tried to get my aged father to be able to see whatthis sport is; even after he broke his hip, he got no pass. It’s not baseball,basketball, or football; it’s not boxing, hockey, tennis, or golf. It’s noteven dog or horse racing. All of those sports he had had to write aboutat least once for a living; all of those were legible to a man of his genera-tion, race, and class. No, I insisted, this time you learn agility, the sportof middle-aged women and their talented dogs, which will somedayoccupy the prime-time Monday night TV slot, which is now makingdo with that man-breaking sport called football. I showed him diagramsof international-level Masters courses, explained what’s involved techni-cally, played videos of the USDAA (United States Dog Agility Associa-tion) Nationals when he was wild with pain and hallucinating on opiates,and wrote him accounts of Cayenne’s and my variously comic and tragicexploits. He could not die; he was a sportswriter; he was my father.I wanted his regard; I wanted his approval; I wanted him to get it. I didnot think he was watching or listening, except to murmur cheerful en -couragement in a paternal tone, along the lines of“It’s nice to have some-thing you enjoy so much.” This sport was oﬀthe radar for a sportswriterof his formation.176dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




Then, in the summer of , when he was out of the rehab center,into his own room in an enhanced-care residential facility, and beginningto experience a lot less pain, just for fun I sent him a video of Cayenne andme running some courses at an AKC trial. I said, “This is what we did lastweekend; this is what a bunch of the other players did; this is what thegame looks like.” He wrote me back a game story, crafted with all of hisconsiderable professional skill.9He analyzed the runs; he took apart thecoherencies and incoherencies. He saw in detail what was at stake, howthe canine and human players moved, what worked and did not work.He wrote the game story as if he were a scout for a Major League Base-ball team. He not only got it, he got it at the same professional level thathe got the events that he was paid for, and he wrote it to me and Cayenne.He gave me—gave us—his regard. It’s how he made a living.TWO CODAS: GRIEF, MEMORY, AND STORYI. August 25, 2004Dear Donnie,Amazing! That was my ﬁrst reaction upon seeing my(almost) -year-old daughter running with her young,high-spirited, lightning-fast pooch in highly-skilledcompetition. I marveled at the split-second timing requiredfor you and Cayenne to communicate with each other. Yes,I noticed an occasional brief breakdown, quickly remediedas you resumed your run. Honestly, I was impressed. Littledid I know when you cuddled up in my arms as a toddlerthat you would be running a dog in competition at the ageof ! I replayed the video several times and thoroughlyenjoyed it.The die is cast. I am working on the Broncos’ stats crewFriday night. Wish me luck.Much love,DadThat game was the last one Dad worked. He died a year later.ABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd177




When I wrote “A Note of a Sportswriter’s Daughter: CompanionSpecies,” I remembered this letter as if it had been written in August ,not . I remembered more detail on the runs than there was. Onlyafter ﬁnishing the paper did I dig the letter out of my ﬁles to add quotesfrom Dad and ﬁnd the dates for a footnote. Then I understood more thanI wanted to know about how grief reworks truth to tell another truth.Fiercely accurate, I remembered the love in this letter. But I redid time,and time chastened me. I learned again that the line between ﬁction andfact in family stories goes through the living room. The documentingpractices of scholarship slice the heart, but they cannot undo the story.“Bodies in the Making: Transgressions and Transformations”—that iswhat stories chronicle. Stories re-member.II. After the Game: “Somewhere off Thirty-fourth Street”Filed by a sportswriter’s daughter, December , In the season of recalling miracles on Thirty-fourth Street,Kris Kringle must take a back seat to a marvel that happenedcloser to home. It happened to Cayenne and me inCalifornia’s decidedly nonmetropolitan Central Valley. Sucha marvel will never happen again. Maybe I dreamed it. Ihesitate to tell you in case I wake up. Maybe I’ll write againlater. No, I must check to see if reality holds. Here goes . . .Cayenne and I received four perfect qualifying scoresout of four runs (ExB Std, ExA JWW) at the SacramentoDog Training Club’s AKC trial at Rancho Murieta Fridayand Saturday.There, I said it. The sun is still shining, and so I’ll risktelling you the rest. If the earth shakes, I’ll stop.Only international competitor Sharon Freilich’s Rip,among all the Excellent Class dogs of both A and B sections,was faster than we were in three of the runs. In the“Jumpers with Weaves” run on Saturday, we were less than.seconds behind Sharon and Rip. Oh my. Now I willwake up for sure.Recklessly, I forge on.178dABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES




In the remaining run, an ExB Standard, we were ﬁfth,behind a bunch of scruﬀy big-name border collies, includingboth of Sharon’s dogs (Rip and Cirque). Three secondsseparated the second- and ﬁfth-place dogs. If Cayenne hadnot wanted to discuss the latest scandal of the Bushadministration while I was earnestly suggesting a down onthe pause table, we might have been ﬁrst and deﬁnitelysecond. So, we took two ﬁrst places in our ExA JWW and asecond in our other ExB Standard (behind Rip, or did Ialready mention that?), all with tight turns, serious focus,weaves to use in a teaching video, and blazing times. (I willnot mention, although perhaps this is the reason the sun isstill shining and the earth not shaking, our less-than-perfectstart line holds.)Am I happy? Is Cayenne a Klingon warrior princess?Oh yes. How do I know? Because the sun is still shining.ABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIESd179




This page intentionally left blank 




7. SPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP“Species of Friendship” is a collage of e-mails that I sent tomy academic colleagues, dogland mentors, agility trainers and fel-low players, human family, and a motley of friends between and . The correspondence is part of “Notes of a Sportswriter’sDaughter,” which I started in honor of my journalist father, in orderto explore some of the excitement, intensity, puzzlement, insight,friendship, competitiveness, love, support, and vulnerability that erupt inthe worlds of sports-oriented companion species. The posts range frommeditations about dog behavior at an oﬀ-leash beach to witnessingthe pragmatics of comfort shared between my dying mother-in-law andour dogs. These e-mails are an odd hybrid of ﬁeld notes, letters, andpersonal journal entries. They also read like love letters to particulardogs—my agility partners, Roland and Cayenne. Other posts fromthese “Notes” pepper the chapters of this book. E-mail sociality isa lively scholarly topic these days, and perhaps these posts add tothe data, if not to the analysis. However, their scholarly value,or lack of it, is not what motivates their placement in WhenSpecies Meet.Rather, these posts are traces of the intense




beginnings of encounters in dogland, with people and dogs, that havereshaped my heart, mind, and writing. I oﬀer them with trepidation toreaders other than those for whom they were ﬁrst crafted, in the hopethat they provoke some of the intensity and puzzlement of being a novicein dogland.META-RETRIEVERS ON THE BEACHVicki Hearne, an accomplished dog trainer and writer, was an e-mailcorrespondent on CANGEN-L in the late s.October Dear Vicki,Now, I see that I lied to you about Roland’s “prey drive”and “herding” potential—i.e., his temperament, if Iunderstand your sense of the root temper.Watching himwith you lurking inside my head over the last week mademe remember that such things are multidimensional andsituational, and describing a dog’s temperament takes moreprecision than I achieved.We go to an oﬀ-leash, large, cliﬀ-enclosed beach inSanta Cruz almost every day. There are two main classes ofdogs there: retrievers and meta-retrievers. Roland is ameta-retriever. (My husband, Rusten, points out there isreally a third class of dogs too—the “nons”—not in the gameat issue here.) Roland will play ball with us once in a while(or anytime we couple the sport with a liver cookie or two),but his heart’s not in it. The activity is not really self-rewarding to him, and his lack of style there shows it. Butmeta-retrieving is another matter entirely. The retrieverswatch whoever is about to throw a ball or stick as if theirlives depend on the next few seconds. The meta-retrieverswatch the retrievers with an exquisite sensitivity todirectional cues and microsecond of spring. These metadogs do notwatch the ball or the human; they watch theruminant-surrogates-in-dog’s-clothing.182dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




Roland in metamode looks like an Aussie–border colliemock-up for a lesson in Platonism. His forequarters arelowered, forelegs slightly apart with one in front of the otherin hair-trigger balance, his hackles in midrise, his eyesfocused, his whole body ready to spring into hard, directedaction. When the retrievers sail out after the projectile, themeta-retrievers move out of their intense eye and stalk intoheading, heeling, bunching, and cutting their charges withjoy and skill. The good meta-retrievers can even handle morethan one retriever at a time. The good retrievers can dodgethe metas and still make their catch in eye-amazing leaps—or surges into the waves, if things have gone to sea.Since we have no ducks or other surrogate sheep orcattle on the beach, the retrievers have to do duty for themetas. Some retriever people take exception to this multi-tasking of their dogs (I can hardly blame them), so those ofus with metas try to distract our dogs once in a while withsome game they inevitably ﬁnd much less satisfying. I drew amental Larson cartoon on Thursday watching Roland, anancient and arthritic Old English sheepdog, a lovely redtricolor Aussie, and a border collie mix of some kind form anintense ring around a shepherd–lab mix, a plethora of motleygoldens, and a game pointer who hovered around a humanwho—liberal individualist to the end—was trying to throwhis stick to his dog only. Meanwhile, in the distance, a rescuewhippet was eating up sand in roadrunner fashion, pursuedby a ponderous, slope-hipped GSD.It remains true that I can call Roland oﬀof a deerchase on the logging road near our house in Sonoma Countymost of the time; coursing a deer is not a meta-retrievingtask worthy of an Aussie–chow, from his point of view.There are terriers on the Santa Cruz beach too, andterrier mixes of all sorts. Why don’t I seewhat the terrieresquecrowd are doing? I am going to listen and watch.I end with an appealing, neurotic, Airedale–black Labcross who spends his beach time day after day trying to burySPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd183




an old Monterey cypress branch, about three feet long andthree inches in diameter, in the sand. He digs heroic holes,ignoring the pleas of his human to do anythingelse, but thecurly, wire-haired, Labish-looking pooch keeps digging deepholes of small diameter for one end of his giant andrecalcitrant stick. Nothing else matters.Beached in dogland,DonnaNOVICE PLAY, NOVICE PLAYERSSeptember Dear C.A. [Aussie health and genetics activist, dog worldmentor, and friend],Roland was inspiring on Sunday. Most of all, he waspatently happy all day (we were at the agility trials for ninehours total, plus four hours of driving). He basked in all theattention, thought his exercise pen (a new experience forhim) was a ﬁne place to rest and watch all the dogs betweenwalks and runs, regarded the brace of barking Jack Russellterriers next door to us with detachment, and met theperformance demands on and around the course with veryfew signs of stress (a few yawns was all) and lots of evidenceof enjoyment. His runs were solid and bode well for hisgetting his novice titles without too much fuss in thenot-so-distant future (or so I dream).We did not get a qualifying leg in the Standard coursebecause we missed the entry to the weave poles, entering atthe second pole on each try. In the Novice Class in theUSDAA rules, you get to retry the weave poles as often asyou need to get the *#*!* things properly negotiated, butafter the third try for a correct entry I just let him weave andwent on with the course. We’ll just get more practice onweave entries at home and in class. He wasn’t fast overall,but still within allowed time, and he stayed with me mentally.I have a tendency to get physically ahead of him, partly184dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




because working with Cayenne is so diﬀerent and partlybecause I am a border collie at heart myself, but I amlearning to pay better attention to Roland’s rhythms. Hesticks too close to me, and we need to do some more distancetargeting exercises over two or three jumps in succession toget him running out with more drive.His jumpers run was very good, marred only a little byhis losing momentum at the ﬁrst pinwheel after the wingjump and needing some strong pushing to get over the nextjump, foiling my plans for a clean backcross and fast pivot.I need to remember who heis and keep us a team. I think Iconfused him at the wing jump right before the ﬁrstpinwheel jump and slowed him down at just the wrongpoint. The last two-thirds of the jumper course was a realhigh for both of us. He was much faster and sailed throughthe second pinwheel and the hurdles, with a fun, fast ﬁnishSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd185

Roland jumping at a Bay Team agility trial in 2001. Courtesy of Tien Tran Photography.




over a double jump. We were both excited by the end andthat made us more accurate and clean.A couple of friends from local Aussie rescue stayedalmost two hours after their runs just to watch Roland’s lastrun (our class was the last event of the whole day), and thatfelt really good. Susan Caudill (Willem the Pyr’s person,who now lives on our land) ﬁlmed the runs, along withseveral others, on her videocamera; so it was useful to look atthe runs afterward to see what we all did. Our next event isthe AKC Sir Francis Drake trials on September . I think Iam getting hooked on agility!Cayenne will have her ﬁrst birthday before long—howcan a year have gone by? Watching her entice Roland intoplaying with her this morning was a stitch. She just keptsqueaking her toy in his face and running oﬀuntil he gave inand chased her and then played tug-of-war with the toy. Sheruns circles around him and is uncatchable unless she letsherself be caught. I have the impression that just to keep himin the game she deliberately gets herself into parts of theyard where Roland has some advantage because of his weightand strength and so can pin her momentarily against a fenceor into a gully. If she just keeps beating him to toys or runstoo fast and pivots too abruptly, he loses interest. If she getshim into a really playful state of mind, he’ll go belly up forher and wrestle with her for a long time, handicappinghimself by staying in a down position and chewing gently onher proferred parts while she assaults him with abandonfrom above. With her Pyr buddy Willem, she hangs on tothe base of his feathery tail and gets dragged across his yard;then she lets go and circles him furiously, herding him whereshe wants. It’s hard to be grumpy myself in the morningwatching this kind of joyful doggish beginning! Of course,coﬀee also helps . . .Learning to be a novice,Donna186dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




BABY WEAVESFebruary Dear friends,News bulletin for the agility addicted and theirlong-suﬀering mentors: Yesterday in our back yard, MsCayenne Pepper graduated to twelve in-line weave poles,moving up from a six one-inch staggered and six in-linechannel weave setting. She shoots through in-line accuratelywith speed.Her entrances need work—she can run by theentrance and then not know how to get in. We’ll work onthat, using some of the ideas Kirstin Cole gave me. Butyesterday afternoon, she did the twelve poles perfectly abouteight times, four from each end. Then she was able to take ajump at a forty-ﬁve-degree angle after the weave pole exitand keep driving without any problem. Treats all around!SPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd187

Cayenne weaving at a Bay Team agility trial in 2003. Courtesy of Tien Tran Photography.




I also had her jump (sixteen-inch practice height), turnforty-ﬁve degrees and enter correctly into the right side ofthe poles, weave twelve poles, turn ninety degrees to abox-and-inclined-plywood sheet that I used for target/touchpractice, stop correctly (two feet on, two feet off), and thenget treated. She did it!We have the elementary right and left commands now,and I am looking forward to seeing if they are functional onsome serpentines outside our backyard. Her swing andaround commands are working well, and she will dosequenced obstacles when I am up to about ten to twelvefeet away from her, driving her from behind. (She, of course,is hardly being driven; but the notion feeds my sense ofhaving something to do out there! She’s racing!) Sometimesshe will do the weave poles as a send-away (one-inch oﬀset inchannel weave setup), and she’s gotten reliable at send-awaysinto the tunnel (until she ate the child play tunnel last week)or over one or two jumps (not three unless I bait a touchplate at the end of the sequence). We haven’t done any realobstacle discrimination work.Her verymouthy “herding” pestering of other dogs atthe dog park is a sight to see. Folks at the park regard her asa kind of playground director. Trouble is, she’s getting toocommitted to this project! We need to get her to obeycall-oﬀs better when she gets too pesky and in-the-face ofother dogs, especially retrievers trying to do their job. Sheprovoked another young Aussie into a ﬁght yesterday that wehad to break up. We’ll start putting her on leash and goingto another area of the park if she disobeys settle-downcommands and keeps bothering other dogs. Sound right?Other ideas for controlling this nuisance behavior? There’s aﬁne line here between play that all the dogs like and MsCayenne fomenting a riot.Roland is interesting to watch in relation to Cayenne’spark behavior. He monitors the goings-on from somedistance, not letting the youngsters interfere with his188dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




collecting more human members for his growing park fanclub, who might be prevailed upon for a tasty treat or dueadulation. But when the goings-on among the chasing andplaying dogs get rowdy, he switches from his people-focused“aren’t I the softest dog you’ve ever seen?” friend-and-treatscavenging mode into an all “alpha dog who was a wolf onlyyesterday” (coat hair partially lofted, hacked-oﬀtail raised ashigh as he can get it, head up, eyes bright, muscles shiningthrough, and a fast, prancing gait), whose only concern isother canines. Looking about six inches taller than he is, heruns between the rowdy dogs, not infrequently hip-bumpingthe dog Cayenne is playing with out of the way. He can stoprowdy behavior cold and split dogs oﬀfrom each other like achampion shedding sheep. (He can also join in and becomepart of the bumptious scene, but not in the same way asCayenne, because he doesn’t have the utterly hard-wired,in-your-face need to bark, chase, head oﬀ, turn, and nip untilthe other dog morphs into the tough cow Cayenne [akadaughter of Slash V] always knew s/he was underneath thedog-park disguise.)Weaving in line,DonnaHOME STUDYMarch , Dear friends,Catherine de la Cruz roped me into doing a homeassessment in Santa Cruz for Great Pyrenees rescue thisweek, if you can imagine! I think she ﬁgured that our Willemfence-building exploits qualiﬁed me—especially since shedoesn’t have any real Pyrish person in Santa Cruz and wantsa report about a woman who wants one of the dogs whomCatherine is responsible for. I consulted with my brotherRick about how he does adoption home studies for humanSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd189




rescues. Rick is director of Catholic Family Services inRaleigh, and he does a lot of assessments prior to rehomingchildren. He reinforced my sense that the job is to be theadoptee’s advocate while remaining the soul of tact. Why amI quaking in my boots?! I don’t even have a novice leg in fenceengineering! (Good fences seem to be nonnegotiable forplacing a rescue Pyr!)Speaking of novice legs, Roland and I did not get anyin Madera Saturday at the USDAA trials. We did makeinteresting mistakes. I think that means we might be ableto learn from them. Carefully timing her remarks to makean impact without damaging the novice handler’s fragileself-esteem, our teacher Gail Frazier tactfully said that thereason Roland and I did not do well in our Standard coursewas that I neglected to give Roland any information duringthe run! That sounds pretty basic, I must say. She was, alas,quite correct. We missed getting our Gamblers run by .seconds, but we got our points and then all the requiredobstacles in sequence, which have to be worked at a (tiny, i.e.,novice) distance. We were overtime because I set Roland upbadly for the run at the jump to tunnel opener into theGamble, and so he came back from the tunnel entrance todiscuss the rule book with me before he agreed to go into thetunnel. Our discussion took several seconds. Next time I’lldiscuss all the ﬁne print with him before our run! The goodpart is that he didgo into the tunnel and ﬁnish the Gamblesequence correctly.I talked with Dad yesterday on the phone and waxedall analytical about our agility runs in Madera, thinking he,as a sportswriter, would want a blow-by-blow account. Heinterrupted me to tell a baseball story. Donna, he said, youremember Andy Cohen, who used to manage the DenverBears when you were a kid? Sure, I said, that’s when theBears were a Yankee farm club. Right, says Dad. Well, hereminisces, Andy was watching a hitter at batting practice atspring training one time. Now this hitter, a center ﬁelder, was190dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




supposed to be the Bears’ best hope for the season, but hewas swinging at pitch after pitch and hitting nothing butair. He starts analyzing what he’s doing wrong, and it justgets worse. Andy gets fed up and tells the guy to get out ofthe batter’s box. The manager steps in, sets his stance, linesup his bat, and gets ready to clobber the ball into thestratosphere. The pitch comes in; Andy swings and misses,the air hissing in the bat’s wake. This sorry picture isrepeated about ten times, as Andy swings and misses. Thenhe steps out of the batter’s box, aims a spray of tobacco juiceat a passing ground beetle, gives the bat back to the haplesshitter, wipes his hands on his pants, and says, “There, now doyou see what you are doing?”As the bumper sticker says, “Shut up and train,”DonnaENFORCERApril , Dear friends,Nice thing at the dog beach this afternoon: Rolandthe HuﬄePuﬀEnforcer was looking like he might get intoa ﬁght with a couple of big-balled big males, and somesparring was already under way. Rusten and I were nearby,and I said ﬁrmly, “Leave It, Come, Sit!” Miracle of miracles,he left it, came, and sat. I was thanking my lucky stars, andremembering Pyr alpha bitch Catherine de la Cruz’s andLinda Weisser’s daunting stories of breaking up ﬁghts amonglarge dogs, knowing I could not have measured up. Rustenlooked grateful to some sort of deity too, even though he isbraver than I am, or perhaps just more committed to notletting anyone in this world get hurt.Then what to my wondering ears should I hear but thepatter of my fellow dog beach humans, saying, “My, my, didyou see that! That dog just walked out of a ﬁght and cameSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd191




and sat! How do they get him to do that?” Good question.“Liver cookie” seems such a mundane answer. But then, Inever did rise above the level of popular religion—at leastnot since I retired from wannabe Jesuit.As the masthead on The Barksays, “Dog is my co-pilot.”Reverently grateful,DonnaKLINGON WARRIOR PRINCESSMay , Dear Friends,Ms Cayenne Pepper has shown her true species beingat last. She’s a female Klingon in heat. Now, you may notwatch much TV or be a years’ long fan of the Star Trekuniverse like I am, but I’ll bet the news that Klingon femalesare formidable sexual beings, whose tastes run to theferocious, has reached everyone. The Pyr on our land, theintact twenty-month-old Willem, has been Cayenne’splaymate since they were both puppies, beginning at aboutfour months. Cayenne was spayed when she was six and ahalf months old. She’s always happily humped her way downWillem’s soft and inviting backside, starting at his head endwith her nose pointed to his tail, while he lies on the groundtrying to chew her leg or lick a rapidly passing genital area.But during our Memorial weekend’s brief stay on theHealdsburg land things have heated up, put mildly. Willem isa randy, gentle, utterly inexperienced adolescent male soul(and Susan makes very sure he stays inexperienced andproperly fenced!). Cayenne does not have an estrus hormonein her body (but let us not forget those very much presentadrenal cortices pumping out aldosterone and other so-called androgens that get lots of the credit for juicing upmammalian desire in males and females). But she is oneturned on little bitch with Willem, and he is interested.192dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




She does not do this with any other dog, “intact” or not.None of their sexual play has anything to do with remotelyfunctional heterosexual mating behavior—no eﬀorts ofWillem to mount, no presenting of an attractive femalebackside, not much genital sniﬃng, no whining and pacing,none of all that “reproductive” stuﬀ. No, here we have purepolymorphous perversity that is so dear to the hearts of allof us who came of age in the s reading Norman O.Brown. Willem lies down with a bright look in his eye.Cayenne looks positively crazed as she straddles her genitalarea on the top of his head, her nose pointed toward his tailend, and presses down and wags her backside vigorously. Imean hard and fast. He is trying for all he’s worth to get histongue on her genitals, which inevitably dislodges her fromthe top of his head. Looks a bit like the rodeo, with herriding a bronco and staying on as long as possible. They haveslightly diﬀerent goals in this game, but both are committedto the activity. Sure looks like eros to me. Deﬁnitely notagape. They keep this up for about ﬁve minutes to theexclusion of any other activity. Then they go back to it foranother round. And another. Susan’s and my laughing,whether raucous or discreet, does not merit their attention.Cayenne growls like a female Klingon during the activity,teeth bared. She’s playing, but oh my, what a game. Willem isearnestly intent. He is not a Klingon, but what we would calla considerate lover.Have you seen anything like this with a spayed femaleand an intact male? Or any other combination, for that matter? Their youth and vitality seem to have made a mockery ofreproductive heterosexual hegemony, as well as of abstinence-promoting gonadectomies. Now, I, of all people, who havewritten all-too-infamous books about how we Westernhumans project our social orders and desires onto animalswithout scruple, should know better than to see conﬁrmationof Norman O. Brown’s Love’s Bodyin my spayed Aussiedynamo and Susan’s talented landscape guardian dog withSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd193




that big, sloppy, velvety tongue. Still, what do you think isgoing on? (Hint: This is not a game of fetch or chase.)Should I tell the writers of the Star Trek world anythingabout the real Klingon on earth?Time to get to real work!DonnaSKUNKEDSeptember , Dear friends,Roland got his third qualifying leg in Novice Standardat USDAA this weekend, and so is now oﬃcially a titledmutt: Agility Dog!To celebrate, Rusten and I bought a big steak for Roland,Cayenne, and all the dogs who owned the people who had abarbecue at Gail Frazier’s RV on Saturday after the runs.Then Roland, AD, promptly got skunked, literally.Hardly seems fair, but at the motel while he was doing hislast duties of the day, he got sprayed full in the face. Rustenmade an p.m. dash for a twenty-four-hour drug storesomewhere in Hayward to get hydrogen peroxide, bakingsoda, and Tecnu® (works on the same principle as it does forpoison oak—pulls the oil out and then washes away withsoap and water). I held the reeking, titled victor in theparking lot until Rusten got back with the supplies. Wethen escorted him into the tiled motel bathroom, where Istripped, got in the tub with him, and Rusten and I beganthe always edifying process of getting skunk perfume oﬀtheface and neck of a dog at midnight. The best that can be saidis that his odor was socially acceptable (humanly speaking)Sunday morning, and the Vagabond Inn in Hayward is stillaccepting dogs. I wish they’d evict their resident skunks.So many ways to be humiliated in agility—a regularschool for moral growth!194dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




Cayenne didn’t get any qualifying Standard runs inthree tries, but our mistakes were interesting (read: hours oftraining and a lot of luck will ﬁx this!). Best of all, she had adynamite run Monday afternoon in Jumpers. Clean run; ﬁfthplace. Her pace was blindingly fast, but she cannot be said tohave taken the shortest path to very many of the jumps.Never have I seen such wide turns without a wrong courseresulting! She was joyful, and we had a ball for .harrowing seconds.My injured Achilles tendons did not pop. I ranwrapped in layers of neoprene, a material I owe either tothe space race or to money-drenched professional football.Rusten ordered ice and more ibuprofen after all the runs.I’m only limping a little tonight. It’s nice to have a residenttrainer—almost as good as intact connective tissue itself.Oﬀto Gail’s for our next lesson tomorrow. We work ontight turns to get that ﬁfth place to ﬁrst!Pam Richards and I are going to do Novice Pairstogether at the USDAA meet in Madera in October—shewith Cappuccino, I with Cayenne. (Capp and Cayenne arelittermates, born //, both red merles, both half masks,both ﬂashy, fast dogs. Besides Capp’s being the tallest dogfrom that litter and Cayenne the shortest, the maindiﬀerence is Pam and Cappuccino are seriously well-trainednational competitors! Oh, I forgot the sexual diﬀerence, but,as usual, that hardly signiﬁes.) Stay tuned.Cheers,DonnaWOBBLIESApril , Dear indulgent dog friends,Cayenne Warrior Princess got her Novice Agilitycertiﬁcate in the North American Dog Agility CouncilSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd195




[NADAC] on Saturday! We worked hard for that one. She’sa crowd pleaser whether we run accurately or not—speedand athleticism are bothin her lexicon. I, of course, like theruns when we are both doing the same course and notindulging in independent course design, each without regardfor the judge’s version, or in casual jump bar demolition ortunnel hopping. Sunday, I was convinced Cayenne is really aWobblie organizing an anarchist strike against accurateperformance of the contact obstacles. No sooner had westarted running at the Open level than she popped everycontact, maybe hitting one or two by accident, but surely notby her devious intention.Speaking of tunnel hopping, Saturday we also got aclean run Q and fourth place in “Tunnelers,” a new NADACgame. That fourth place was in relation to all the twenty-inch category dogs, even the Elite crowd. We were fast,and she was on with her “lefts” and “rights.” Thrilling, to tellthe truth.I remain ﬁrmly in love with this canine demon. Goodthing.Next agility stop is Power Paws Camp, May –. It’sfortunate I can call all this research for publishing “Notes of aSportswriter’s Daughter.” I hope the IRS agrees . . .As they wisely say, “Shut up and train!”DonnaDIVAMay , Hi Gail,I’ll see you in the morning, but got the urge to tap outan entry for “Notes of a Sportswriter’s Daughter” ﬁrst. Theoccasion is recovery from the NADAC meet at Elk Groveover the Memorial Day weekend. I think I’ll need at leasttwelve steps and a higher power.196dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




Ms C. Pepper needs a new name; and a temperamental,hypertalented, ﬂagrantly unpredictable opera star comes tomind. Diva Dog. Saturday morning, she burned through anOpen Gamblers course with seventy-one points, a Q, andﬁrst place. We would have had eighty-one points if she hadn’tpopped poles in her weaves. There was time to spare beforethe whistle blew, but we were in position. She made herten-point optional last obstacle in the Gamble after therequired two, four, six, eight. She also did a sizzlingTunnelers, earning a second place, a Q, and her NoviceTunnelers title. She and the ﬁrst-place dog (a border collie,I am forced to say) got the fastest two scores out of all thedogs of all classes and sizes in the Tunnelers event—abouta hundred dogs.But then Sunday, Cayenne was in her own zone, ﬂyingto the beat of some unknown canine devil. She held her staysat the start line with a wild look in her eye and every muscletaut. There were no breaks before the “all right” at the startline no matter how far I led out, but we had precious littlecontrol after she ﬂew over the ﬁrst obstacles. She was eitherrigid with anticipation on the start line or ﬂying in somepersonal gravity-free space all day. It was all wide turns andfailure to touch any part of the contact obstacles—up, down,or top! Some of this was ﬂawed handling, some inconsistenttraining, and some was something else. She was just plainwild and unfocused. I was nervous and telegraphed that toher. I left the rings muttering that I’d consider taking bids ona certain young agility prospect; I savored the fantasy ofturning down the million dollar ﬁgures for Cayenne thatwould be forthcoming! Frank Butera was very calming,reminding me of the wild ride he and Cayenne’s brotherRoca (same parents, earlier breeding) had a couple of yearsago. Rusten propped up my despairing soul.Monday, I had signed up to run only with Roland.What a diﬀerent dog! He got a fourth place in NoviceJumpers, but didn’t Q because he had a .second time fault,SPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd197




consequent on his checking out a human pole setter on hisway round the hurdles. He got a solid fourth place and Q onhis Novice Touch ’n Go. He missed his Gamble after a nicebut unspectacular thirty-three-point opening (he got sixGamble points). Only one dog got the Gamble in the novicetwenty-inch class. Renzo, Cayenne’s brother and Paul Kirk’snew dog from the Oxfords’ last breeding of Randy and Bud,got the top score in that Gamblers run, but no Q either.Roland got a rock-solid but not fast Q in his Tunnelers run.Finally, he was solid and within time in his Standard run.Running with Roland felt very nice, very calming. He was arock-solid partner dog. All the mistakes were obvioushandler errors, and he gave me plenty of time to think on thecourse. Cayenne looked utterly unbelieving that Roland wasgetting all the attention, and she was left waiting in her crate.I was unsympathetic.Trouble is, I am in love with Cayenne and want to begood for and with her. Really good. Desire is a devil in a redmerle coat.See you in the morning,DonnaTALES FROM THE CRYPTTuesday, September , Dear Gail,Roland was great Sunday, and Cayenne was worse byfar. Roland got his second Open Standard qualifying run(and a second place), and so he only needs one more Q forhis Open title. Because I’ve been concentrating on Cayenne,he’s only run in two Standard events in Open—one lastFebruary and one Sunday. I am very proud of the boy—andhe was proud of himself. At least, he deﬁnitely knew he wasdoing well. His fur was shining and his body was round andbeautiful. His face was wide, eyes alert, and whole self198dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




attuned to me as his team member. We were, in short,communicating, on and oﬀthe course.Now to “tales from the Crypt”!Saturday, Cayenne popped the A-frame contact in herotherwise fairly good Novice Standard. She did a correct dogwalk contact (including waiting for the release), but did nothold the teeter as long as she should have—and I did notgive her clear information about what I wanted there. I leftthe course with her after the teeter, and gave her quiet,deﬁnite, standing-still “wrongs” at the A-frame and dog walk,bringing her back before we went on. But she was in highstress mode—very squirrelly.At home, I can’t get her to miss two-on, two-oﬀ(orfour-on for the teeter); and she waits for the releasecommand, even if I climb the roof and throw hamburgers(well, you see what I mean). In class, she is consistent atmaking the contacts correctly, but will break her positionbefore the release if I move oddly or ask her to stay too longand she is excited. In the trials, she is, at this point, almostnever making the A-frame contacts at all, and she pops thedog walk about percent of the time. Help!!!!Sunday, she was simply wild—a Klingon WarriorPrincess in her own world. She popped contacts all over herStandard run and had poor attention in her Jumpers event.She seemed stressed out and unresponsive, something shehas done before when Roland is also there. I think I need totake her and Roland separately, at least for now.Thanks for promising to think with me tomorrow abouthow we can make some headway on the contact problem.We have a trial in Dixon this weekend. Stay tuned!I ought to be doing my real work!Cayenne’s inconsistent trainer and your abject student,DonnaSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd199




SMITTENJanuary Dear long-suﬀering dog friends,So now I indulge in the pleasurably embarrassingcustom of “the brag” . . .Ms Cayenne Pepper was truly lovely this weekend at aHaute Dawgs NADAC trial at Starﬂeet. We ran in theOpen class for all events.Miracle of miracles, I saw four paws on each and everycontact zone; and three-quarters of the time (actual count)she held two-on, two-oﬀlike she had superglue on her feet.I know that’s not percent, and my character and herfuture are a ruin for running after such failures; but we didrun on after I stated emphatically, “Oops! Sit!”The last event of the weekend was the best. TheJumpers setup was three rows of four jumps, equally spacedin ranks, with two U-shaped tunnels set up outside therectangle of jumps at one end. It was like the setup Pamshowed us at Gail’s in December. In Elite, both tunnels weretraps; in Open one tunnel was a trap and the other was ajudge-approved boomerang launching device. The path wasreally a big X hooked together with U-turns and serpentines(and in Elite, an extra little loop thrown in).Xo and Chris did a fabulous job in the Elite version;they ﬂowed like a graceful, fast river populated by aDoberman bitch and a human man. Cayenne was anaccurate blur in the Open version, which opened with adiagonal across four jumps, a U-turn and straight run overthree jumps, another U-turn and straight down the secondline of three jumps, into a three-jump serpentine, endingwith a layered ﬂing into the yawning mouth of a tunnel,whereby the dog was catapulted into the ﬁnal diagonal runacross four jumps.Cayenne’s ﬁrst place was a .-second run (secondsunder Standard course time and seconds ahead of a nice, fastAussie who dogged our heels all weekend). I watched andcheered, occasionally waving my hands, probably in a jerky200dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




fashion and blessedly outside her range of vision, to tell herwhat to do. I guess my feet and shoulders were in the rightplaces at the right times, and I must have run too because Iwas out of breath. Cayenne had apparently analyzed thecourse correctly, because she did not make so much as a falsetwitch. I think I said, “Go!” once or twice. No time for “Over!”and who needed it anyway? What else could she do?Cayenne contributed to breed science this weekendtoo, in the form of cheek cells for a UC Davis gene analysisproject on ivermectin and related drug metabolism. Theresearcher wielding the cotton swabs said the samples wouldbe stored permanently for possible other future research.Back to real work, alas.Smitten in Santa Cruz,DonnaPERSONALS COLUMNDecember , Dear dog friends,Ms C. Pepper did very well on Sunday at TRACS[Two Rivers Agility Club of Sacramento]. We missed Qs inboth Excellent A Standard and JWW because of one refusalin each, both caused by my ambiguous cueing. She wastwelve seconds under Ex A Standard course time in JWW,but I caused a refusal on the last jump. That was painful!A tiny, little, minuscule hesitation, but at the wrong placeand the judge was, alas, looking. I’m sure perfection is in myfuture, just not sure when!Meanwhile, I read a troubling ad in the personalscolumn of the local newspaper: “Olympic quality dog seeksadequate handler. Inquire discreetly at—our phone number!”She wouldn’t do that, would she?Threatened with abandonment,DonnaSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd201




TOUCHING COMFORTRusten’s mother, troubled by advancing dementia, lived with us for fouryears until she died in late . Below are two stories of companionspecies, the ﬁrst addressed to Karen McNally, my UCSC colleague inearth sciences who gave us Roland as a two-year-old in , the secondaddressed to agility friends.March , Dear Karen,You would have warmed to the sight of Roland thismorning. I was watching out of the corner of my eye fromthe kitchen sink. Roland heard Rusten’s mom stirring aboveand beginning to come down the stairs in her determinedbut shaky step. Roland quietly went to the bottom of thestairs and sat, with his ears held gently back in happy mode,his whole body collected and smooth, and his roundedpuﬀtail swishing back and forth in eager but controlledanticipation. Katharine breached the door between the up-and downstairs, and the two friends made eye contact. Sheand Roland gazed softly at each other for several seconds.A long time. Then she came down the last couple of stairs,holding on to the banister for support. Roland waited calmlyas she accomplished the last step over to him and put hersoft hands around his receptive face. She massaged his facefor several seconds; he just sat very still and smooth, with aface so soft it brought tears to my eyes. Then she walked byhim and said good morning to me as I held out her prettyItalian ceramic cup full of oily, aromatic coﬀee. Companionspecies, indeed.DonnaOctober , Dear agility friends,Rusten’s mother, Katharine, sometimes gets quite crazyand paranoid, usually about ﬁnances. Because her memory is202dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




so fragmentary, she produces continuity in other ways, oftenby narrating experiences that are totally real to her but thatsimply did not happen in the material world. Thoseexperiences can be more real to her than even her cherishedmemories from her childhood. Sometimes these hyperrealexperiences are very nice, like long trips to Alaska, full ofdetails that never happened. Or her certainty that she hasalready seen a ﬁlm we go to, and remembers the people shesaw the ﬁlm with, even though it was only released totheaters that day. Other times the crafted memories are ﬁerceand hurtful, full of terror at her not being in control andfeeling duped or injured by someone. She screamed atRusten yesterday, saying he was calling her a liar. He wenton to tennis anyway, not rising to the bait and knowing thatgetting caught in a loop of explanations of the “real” world(in this case a bill from the dentist that he had already goneover with her many times) would only make her moreagitated. No matter what, R remains incredibly gentle. Notsimple, these aged and needy parents!After R left for tennis, K was quiet for a while, thencame downstairs in tears, almost hysterical, thinking she hadsaid something terrible to Rusten, but not knowing what itwas. It took a long time to comfort her, holding her androcking and telling her she did not say anything awful, andeven if she had been mad at him, everyone has a right to loseit sometimes and freak with anger. I kept telling her about allthe positive things she does all the time and how much Rand I want her and feel blessed that she wants to live with us.That’s true, if not the whole truth! But who needs the wholetruth anyway. She calmed down, needed lots of hugs, andthen went to do the dishes, which comforted her some more.The most interesting thing, though, was not what sheand I were doing, but what she and the dogs were doing thewhole time she was crying and desperate for comfort andrelief from feelings of guilt, shame, and bewilderment. Shewas on the couch, and I was kneeling below her, my handsSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIPd203




on her knees and hugging her periodically. Cayenne slippedher body between us (she would notbe denied) andsnuggled onto K’s lap, with her head pressed hard againstK’s breasts. C’s face was tilted up to K’s head. Every chanceC got, she licked K’s face, then pressed her head againstK’s breasts again. Her spot in K’s lap was nonnegotiable. Shewould not budge until K was calm. Roland, meanwhile, hadhis head inserted between me and K’s lap, putting his headon her knees along with my hands and pressing ﬁrmlyagainst her body with all his weight. He also would notbudge until K was calm. K’s hands the whole time werekneading the dogs’ bodies, ﬁrst one, then the other. She didnot know what she was doing consciously, but the touchcomfort among K, R, and C was stunning. Toward the end,the dogs made K laugh at theirneed for comfort, as well astheir ability to give comfort. That laughter was the last stepin her letting go of her grief and loss that afternoon.From dogland,Donna204dSPECIES OF FRIENDSHIP




8. TRAINING IN THECONTACT ZONEPower, Play, and Inventionin the Sport of AgilityHe enriches my ignorance.—Ian Wedde, “Walking the Dog,” in Making Ends MeetPAYING ATTENTIONVincent the Rhodesian ridgeback was not an agility dog. He wasthe walking and running companion of New Zealand/Aotearoawriter and dog lover, Ian Wedde. Wedde and Vincent have taught memuch that I need to say about the sport of agility, a game that I playwith my fast herding dog, Cayenne. She enriches my ignorance. Playingagility with Cayenne helps me understand a controversial, modern rela-tionship between people and dogs: training to a high standard of per-formance for a competitive sport. Training together, a particular womanand a particu lar dog, not Man and Animal in the abstract, is a historicallylocated, multispecies, subject-shaping encounter in a contact zone fraughtwith power, knowledge and technique, moral questions—and the chancefor joint, cross-species invention that is simultaneously work and play.Writing this chapter with Cayenne is not a literary conceit but acondition of work. She is, legally, a research dog in the Universityof California, just as I am a research human; this status is requiredof both of us if we are to occupy an oﬃce in the History of Con-sciousness Department on the campus of the University of




California at Santa Cruz. I did not originally seek this status for Cayenne;I would have liked her company in the oﬃce simply as my companion.But dogs who are merely friends are banned from UCSC for obscure rea-sons having something to do with a dog’s murdering a donkey thirty-oddyears ago near the old barn on campus, but really having more to do withthe remarkable problem-solving strategies among bureaucrats runningthings in the world. If there is a diﬃculty involving some individuals (un -supervised dogs and clueless humans?), then ban all members of the classrather than solve the problem (retrain the campus community?). Only thedogs, of course, not the clueless humans, were actually banned. That, how-ever, is a story for another day. The material–semiotic exchange betweenCayenne and me over training is the subject of this chapter; it is not aone-sided aﬀair. The chief campus animal control oﬃcer recognized heras a knowledge worker. After careful temperament testing (of Cayenne;I was given a pass although my impulse control is more fragile thanhers) and practical interviews assessing both of us for skills in followingorders, the oﬃcer ﬁlled out papers to legalize Cayenne’s presence. Thebox checked was “research.”Many critical thinkers who are concerned with the subjugation ofanimals to the purposes of people regard the domestication of other sen-tient organisms as an ancient historical disaster that has only grown worsewith time. Taking themselves to be the only actors, people reduce otherorganisms to the lived status of being merely raw material or tools. Thedomestication of animals is, within this analysis, a kind of original sinseparating human beings from nature, ending in atrocities like the meat–industrial complex of transnational factory farming and the frivolities ofpet animals as indulged but unfree fashion accessories in a boundlesscommodity culture. Or, if not fashion accessories, pets are taken to beliving engines for churning out unconditional love—aﬀectional slaves, inshort. One being becomes means to the purposes of the other, and thehuman assumes rights in the instrument that the animal never has in“it”self. One can be somebody only if someone else is something. To beanimal is exactly not to be human and vice versa.Grammatically, this matter shows up in editing policies of majorreference books and newspapers. Animals are not allowed personal pro-nouns such as who,but must be designated by which,that,or it.Some206dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




contemporary reference manuals allow an exception to this: if a particu-lar animal has a name and sex, the animal can be an honorary person des-ignated by personal pronouns; in that case, the animal is a kind of lesserhuman by courtesy of sexualization and naming.1Thus, pets can havenames in the newspapers because they are personalized and familializedbut not because they are somebody in their own right, much less in theirdiﬀerencefrom human personhood and families. Within this frame, onlywild animals in the conventional Western sense, as separate as possiblefrom subjugation to human domination, can be themselves. Only wild ani-mals can be somebody, ends not means. This position is exactly the oppo-site of the grammar reference books’ granting derivative personhood onlyto those animals most incorporated into (Western) humanlike sexualityand kinship.There are other ways to think about domestication that are bothmore historically accurate and also more powerful for addressing past andpresent brutalities and for nurturing better ways to live in multispeciessociality.2Tracking only a few threads in a densely complex fabric, thischapter examines the case of people and dogs working to excel in an in-ternational competitive sport that is also part of globalized middle-classconsumer cultures that can aﬀord the considerable time and money ded-icated to the game. Training together puts the participants inside thecomplexities of instrumental relations and structures of power. How candogs and people in this kind of relationship be means and ends for eachother in ways that call for reshaping our ideas about and practices ofdomestication?Redeﬁning domestication, the Belgian philosopher and psychologistVinciane Despret introduces the notion of “anthropo-zoo-genetic prac-tice,” which constructs both animals and humans in historically situatedinterrelationships. Emphasizing that articulating bodies to each other isalways a political question about collective lives, Despret studies thosepractices in which animals and people become available to each other,become attuned to each other, in such a way that both parties becomemore interesting to each other, more open to surprises, smarter, more“polite,” more inventive. The kind of“domestication” that Despret exploresadds new identities; partners learn to be “aﬀected”; they become “availableto events”; they engage in a relationship that “discloses perplexity.”3TheTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd207




personal pronoun who,which is necessary in this situation, has nothingto do with derivative, Western, ethnocentric, humanist personhood foreither people or animals, but rather has to do with the query proper toserious relationships among signiﬁcant others, or, as I called them else-where, companion species, cum panis,messmates at table together, break-ing bread.4The question between animals and humans here is, Who areyou? and so, Who are we?Whois not a relative pronoun in the co-constitutive relationshipscalled training; it is an interrogative one. All the parties query and arequeried if anything interesting, anything new, is to happen. In addition,whorefers to partners-in-the-making through the active relations ofcoshaping, not to possessive human or animal individuals whose bound-aries and natures are set in advance of the entanglements of becomingtogether. So, how dodogs and people learn to pay attention to each otherin a way that changes who and what they become together?5I will not tryto answer that question in the large; instead, I will try to ﬁgure out howCayenne and I learned to play agility together well enough to earn a mod-est certiﬁcate, if one that we found demanded our laughter, tears, work,and play for thousands of hours over several years: the Masters AgilityDog title in the United States Dog Agility Association. Our champion -ship eludes us; she enriches my ignorance.THE GAME’S AFOOTWhat is the sport of agility?6Picture a grassy ﬁeld or dirt-covered horsearena about one hundred by one hundred feet square. Fill it with ﬁfteento twenty obstacles arranged in patterns according to a judge’s plan. Thesequence of the obstacles and diﬃculty of the patterns depend on thelevel of play from novice to masters. Obstacles include single, double,or triple bar jumps; panel jumps; broad jumps; open and closed tunnelsof various lengths; weave poles, consisting of six to twelve in-line polesthrough which the dog slaloms; pause tables; and contact obstacles calledteeter-totters, A-frames (between .and .feet high, depending onthe organization), and dog walks. These last are called contact obstaclesbecause the dog must put at least a toenail in a painted zone at the upand down ends of the obstacle. Leaping over the contact zone earns a208dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




“failure to perform” the obstacle, which is a high-point penalty. Dogsjump at a height determined by their own height at their shoulders orwithers. Many of the jump patterns derive from those used in horse-jumping events, and indeed horse events are among the sporting parentsof dog agility.Human handlers are allowed to walk through the course for aboutten to ﬁfteen minutes before the dog and human run it; the dog doesnot see the course beforehand at all. The human is responsible for know-ing the sequence of obstacles and for ﬁguring out a plan for human anddog to move fast, accurately, and smoothly through the course. The dogtakes the jumps and navigates the obstacles, but the human has to be inthe right position at the right time to give good information. Advancedcourses are full of trap obstacles to tempt the untimely or the misinformed;novice runs test fundamental knowledge for getting through a courseaccurately and safely with nothing fancy required. In a well-trained team,both human and dog know their jobs, but any knowledgeable observerwill see that the overwhelming number of errors on a course are causedby bad handling on the human’s part. The errors might be bad timing,overhandling, inattention, ambiguous cues, bad positioning, failure tounderstand how the course looks from the point of view of the dog, orfailure to train basics well beforehand. I know all of these disasters fromall-too-much personal experience! Qualifying runs in the higher levels ofthe sport require perfect scores within a demanding time limit. Teams areranked by accuracy and speed, and runs can be decided by hundredthsof seconds. Thus, working for tight turns and eﬃcient paths around thecourse is important.Agility began in at Crufts in the United Kingdom when atrainer of working trial dogs, Peter Meanwell, was asked to design a dog-jumping event to entertain spectators waiting for the main action at theclassy dog show. In , agility returned to Crufts as a regular compe-titive event. After about , agility spread from the United Kingdomto Holland, Belgium, Sweden, Norway, and France, and it has since con-tinued to spread across Europe as well as to North America, Asia, Aus-tralia and New Zealand, and Latin America. The United States DogAgility Association was founded in , followed by other organizationsin the United States and Canada. In the International Federation ofTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd209




Cynological Sports (IFCS) was founded on the initiative of Russia andUkraine to unite dog sport organizations in many countries and holdinternational competitions.7The ﬁrst IFCS world championship was heldin .8The growth in participation in the sport has been explosive, withthousands of competitors in many organizations, all with somewhat dif-ferent rules and games.Workshops, training camps, and seminars abound. Successful com-petitors frequently hang out their shingle as agility teachers, but only afew can actually make a living that way. California is one of the hot spotsof agility, and in that state on any given weekend year-round, severalagility trials will occur, each with two hundred to three hundred or sodogs and their people competing. Most dog–human teams I know trainformally at least once a week and informally all the time. The year I keptcount, I spent about four thousand dollars on everything it took to train,travel, and compete; that is considerably less than many humans spend onthe sport. In the United States, white women about forty to sixty-ﬁve yearsold dominate the sport numerically, but people of several hues, genders,and ages play, from preteens to folks in their seventies. In my experience,lots of human players hold professional jobs to pay for their habit or areretired from such jobs and have some disposable income. Many peoplealso play who make very little money and have hard working-class jobs.9Many breeds and mixed-ancestry dogs compete, but the most com-petitive dogs in their respective height classes tend to be border collies, Aus-tralian shepherds, shelties, and Parson Jack Russell terriers. High-drive,focused, athletic dogs and high-drive, calm, athletic people tend to exceland ﬁnd themselves in the agility news. But agility is a sport of amateurs inwhich most teams can have a great time and earn qualifying runs and titles,if they work and play together with serious intent, lots of training, recog-nition that the dogs’ needs come ﬁrst, a sense of humor, and a willingnessto make interesting mistakes—or, better, make mistakes interesting.Positive training methods, oﬀspring of behaviorist operant condi-tioning, are the dominant approaches used in agility. Anyone trainingby other methods will be the subject of disapproving gossip, if not dis-missed from the course by a judge who is on the lookout for any human’sharsh correction of a dog. Dogs get precious little more leeway if they areharsh with their humans or other dogs! Beginning her training career210dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




with marine mammals in at Hawaii’s Sea Life Park, Karen Pryor isthe most important single person for teaching and explaining positivemethods to the amateur and professional dog-training communities, aswell as many other human–animal communities. Her blend of scienceand practical demonstration has had a major impact.10So, what is posi-tive training?In the simplest terms, positive training methods are standard be -haviorist approaches that work by marking desired actions called behav-iors and delivering an appropriate reward to the behaving organism witha timing that will make a diﬀerence. That’s positive reinforcement. Re-inforcement in behaviorism is deﬁned as anything that occurs in con-junction with an act and has a tendency to change that act’s probability.That bit about “in conjunction with an act” is crucial. Timing is all; tomor-row, or even ﬁve seconds after the interesting behavior, is way too lateto get or give good information in training. A behavior is not somethingjust out there in the world waiting for discovery; a behavior is an inven-tive construction, a generative fact–ﬁction, put together by an intra-actingcrowd of players that include people, organisms, and apparatuses all com-ing together in the history of animal psychology. From the ﬂow of bod-ies moving in time, bits are carved out and solicited to become more orless frequent as part of building other patterns of motion through time.A behavior is a natural–technical entity that travels from the lab to theagility training session.If the organism does something that is not wanted, ignore it andthe behavior will “extinguish” itself for lack of reinforcement (unless theundesired behavior is self-rewarding; then, good luck). Withholdingsocial recognition by not noticing what each other is doing can be a pow-erful negative reinforcement for dogs and people. Supposedly mild nega-tive reinforcers like “time outs” are popular in agility training and humanschools in the United States. Restraint, coercion, and punishment—suchas ear pinching—are actively discouraged in agility training in any situa-tion I have experienced or heard about. Strong negative words like “no!”—emitted in moments of great frustration, broken-down communication,and loss of human calm—are rationed severely, kept for dangerous situ-ations and emergencies, and not used as training tools. In the hands ofunskilled but aspiring lay trainers like me, using strong negative reinforcersTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd211




and punishments is foolish as well as unnecessary, in no small part be -cause we get it wrong and do more harm than good. Just watch a dog shutdown in the face of a tense or negative human and hesitate to oﬀer any-thing interesting with which to build great runs. Positive reinforcement,properly done, sets oﬀa cascade of happy anticipation and inventivespontaneous oﬀerings for testing how interesting the world can be. Posi-tive reinforcement improperly done just reduces the stock of liver cook-ies, chew toys, and popular conﬁdence in behavioral science.11The devil, of course, is in the details. Some of these demons are:•learning how to mark what one thinks one is marking (say, with aclick of a little tin cricket or, less accurately, a word like “yes!”)•timing (i.e., knowing how long after a mark one has to deliver areward and delivering it in that window; otherwise whatever justlast happened is what’s being rewarded)•working and playing in such a way that dogs (and people) oﬀerinteresting things that can be positively reinforced (Luring can helpshow what’s wanted in early training of something new, but luringdoes not reinforce and quickly gets in the way.)•knowing what is really rewarding and interesting to one’s partner•correctly seeing what actually just happened•understanding what one’s partner is in fact paying attention to•learning how to break complex patterns down into technical bits orbehaviors that can be marked and rewarded•knowing how to link behaviors into chains that add up to some-thing useful•knowing how to teach chains of behavior from the last part to theﬁrst (backchaining), by using bits of a behavior chain that a dogalready understands as a reward for a bit that comes right before•knowing how many repetitions are informative and eﬀective andhow many shut everybody down with stress and boredom•knowing how to identify and reward approximations to the end-goal behavior (Trying to teach left and right turns? Start by mark-ing and rewarding spontaneous glances in the desired direction,don’t rush over steps, don’t go so slow that your dog dies of old ageor boredom.)212dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




•knowing when—and how—to stop if something is not working•knowing how and when to back up to something that is easier andalready known by one’s partner if something harder isn’t working•keeping accurate count of the actual frequency of correct responsesin a given task instead of imagining what they are, whether one is inan inﬂationary or deﬂationary mood•keeping learning situations fun and cognitively interesting for one’spartner•evaluating whether or not the dog, the human, and the team actu-ally do know how to do something in all of the circumstances inwhich they will need to perform the “behavior” (Chances are highthat the relevant variable in a real agility trial was left out of train-ing, and so what was the variable that caused a dog who knew herjob, or so one thought, to blow an obstacle? or caused the human tobecome unreadable? Go back and train.)•avoiding tripping on one’s dog or the equipment•perceiving the diﬀerence between a lure, a reward, and a tug ropecrashing into one’s unsuspecting dog’s head because the handlercan’t throw accurately•not dropping food treats and clickers all over the practice ﬁeld•ﬁguring out how to reward oneself and one’s partner when every-thing seems to be falling apartObviously, one would hope, it is essential for a human being to under-stand that one’s partner is an adult (or puppy) member of another spe-cies, with his or her own exacting species interests and individual quirks,and not a furry child, a character in Call of the Wild,or an extension ofone’s intentions or fantasies. People fail this recognition test depressinglyoften. Training together is all extremely prosaic; that is why trainingwith a member of another biological species is so interesting, hard, full ofsituated diﬀerence, and moving.12My ﬁeld notes from classes and com-petitions repeatedly record agility people’s remarks that they are learn-ing about themselves and their companions, human and dog, in ways theyhad not experienced before. For a middle-aged or older woman, learninga new competitive sport played seriously with a member of another speciesprovokes strong and unexpected emotions and preconception-breakingTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd213




thinking about power, status, failure, skill, achievement, shame, risk,injury, control, companionship, body, memory, joy, and much else. Menwho play the sport are almost always in the marked minority, and theyfeel it. It is hard to escape the subject-changing conjunction of gender, age,and species against a background of seemingly taken-for-granted (if notalways empirically accurate) race, sexuality, and class.13The human being actually has to know something about one’s part-ner, oneself, and the world at the end of each training day that she orhe did not know at the beginning. The devil is in the details, and so isthe deity. “Dog is my co-pilot,” says the masthead on the magazine Bark,a motto I repeated like a mantra in e-mail posts with my agility friends.In my experience, very few undertakings in life set such a high and worth-while standard of knowledge and comportment. The dog, in turn, becomesshockingly good at learning to learn, fulﬁlling the highest obligation of agood scientist. The dogs earn their papers.THE CONTACT ZONEBlood on the PathAugust , Dear friends,Cayenne earned her Advanced Agility Dog title in theUnited States Dog Agility Association on Sunday, and sonow we run in the Masters ring! She got a fast, clean,ﬁrst-place run to earn her title; she made me very proud. Wealso ran fast and accurately in the qualifying round of theSteeplechase, placing eighth in a ﬁeld of thirty-seven seriousnational champions and other masters and advancedtwenty-two-inch class dogs. The top ten got to run in theﬁnal round.We bombed the ﬁnal round because I took her oﬀthecourse when she failed to wait for my release word from theA-frame contact, my method these days for training this tooconsistent glitch. It was really hardto leave the coursebefore ﬁnishing the run, because we had a real chance toplace and literally everybody at the meet was watching this214dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




featured event of the day. But we did leave, to the relief of myteacher and mentors. It was harder still to put Cayenne backin her crate with no word of encouragement, food treat, oreven glance. My blood was a thick smear from the place weleft the ring to her crate. However, our reward was threeperfect A-frame contacts in our Snooker game immediatelyafterward. String cheese to Cayenne and self-knowledge tome! She glowed and towed me back to her crate, as if in theIditarod, for heaps of treats and face-to-face smiles.I learn such basic things about honesty in this game,things I should have learned as a child (or before tenurein academia) but never did, things about the actualconsequences of fudging on fundamentals. I become lessshowy and more honest in this game than in any other partof my life. It’s bracing, if not always fun. Meanwhile, myover-the-top love for Cayenne has required my body to builda bigger heart with more depths and tones for tenderness.Maybe that is what makes me need to be honest; maybe thiskind of love makes one need to see what is really happeningbecause the loved one deserves it. This is nothing like theunconditional love that people ascribe to their dogs! Oddand wonderful.Celebrating in Healdsburg,DonnaLet us return to the approximately two-foot-long yellow contact zonepainted onto the up and down ends of teeter-totters, dog walks, and A-frames.14Then, let’s forget dog walks and teeter-totters, because Cayenneand I found their rigors intuitively obvious; the goddess alone knows why.However, at least one murder mystery I know features the A-frame asthe instrument of death.15I understand that plot very well; Cayenne andI came close to killing each other in this contact zone. The problem wassimple: we did not understand each other. We were not communicating;we did not yet havea contact zone entangling each other. The result wasthat she regularly leapt over the down contact, not touching the yellowTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd215




area with so much as a toepad before she raced to the next part of thecourse, much less holding the lovely two-rear-feet on the zone, two-front-feet on the ground until I gave the agreed-on release words (all right) forher to go on to the next obstacle in the run. I could not ﬁgure out whatshe did not understand; she could not ﬁgure out what my ambiguousand ever-changing cues and criteria of performance meant. Faced withmy incoherence, she leapt gracefully over the charged area as if it wereelectriﬁed. It was; it repelled us both. Then, we rejoined each other in acoherent team, but our qualifying run was in the trash can. We performedour contacts correctly in practice, but we failed miserably at trials. Fur-thermore, we were far from alone in this common dilemma for dogs andpeople training together in agility. That paint strip is where Cayenne andI learned our hardest lessons about power, knowledge, and the meaning-ful material details of entanglements.Indeed, I remembered tardily, seven years before Cayenne was bornI already knew that about contact zones from colonial and postcolonialstudies in my political and academic life. In Imperial Eyes,Mary Prattcoined the term contact zone,which she adapted “from its use in linguis-tics, where the term ‘contact language’ refers to improvised languagesthat develop among speakers of diﬀerent native languages who need tocommunicate with each other consistently. . . . I aim to foreground theinteractive, improvisational dimensions of colonial encounters so easilyignored or suppressed by diﬀusionist accounts of conquest and domi-nation. A ‘contact’ perspective emphasizes how subjects are constitutedin and by their relations to each other. . . . It treats the relations . . . interms of co-presence, interaction, interlocking understandings and prac-tices, often within radically asymmetrical relations of power.”16I ﬁndsomething eerily apt in Pratt’s discussion for dog–human doings at thebottom of the A-frame. Cayenne and I deﬁnitely have diﬀerent nativelanguages, and much as I reject overdoing the analogy of colonization todomestication, I know very well how much control of Cayenne’s life anddeath I hold in my inept hands.My colleague Jim Cliﬀord enriched my understanding of contactzones through his nuanced readings of articulations and entanglementsacross borders and among cultures. He eloquently demonstrated how“the new paradigms begin with historical contact, with entanglement at216dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




intersecting regional, national, and transnational levels. Contact approachespresuppose not sociocultural wholes subsequently brought into relation-ship, but rather systems already constituted relationally, entering newrelations through historical processes of displacement.”17I merely addnaturalcultural and multispecies matters to Cliﬀord’s open net bag.I learned much of what I know about contact zones from scienceﬁction, in which aliens meet up in bars oﬀ-planet and redo one anothermolecule by molecule. The most interesting encounters happen whenStar Trek’s universal translator is on the blink, and communication takesunexpected, prosaic turns. My feminist sf reading prepared me to thinkabout dog–human communication dilemmas and (polymorphously per-verse) joys more ﬂexibly than the more hard-boiled imperialist fantasiesfound in sf. I remember especially Naomi Mitchison’s Memoirs of a Space-woman,in which the human communications oﬃcer on space explora -tions had to ﬁgure out how to make “noninterfering” contact with quite anarray of sentient critters; several curious progeny resulted. Suzette HadenElgin’s pan-species linguist sf, starting withNative Tongue,also preparedme for training with dogs. There was no universal translator for Elgin,only the hard work of species’ crafting workable languages. And if shape-shifting skill in the contact zone is the goal, no one should forget SamuelR. Delany’s Babel ,in which intriguing data-ﬂow interruptions seem theorder of the day.18Even more tardily in my agility training dilemmas, I rememberedthat contact zones called ecotones, with their edge eﬀects, are whereassemblages of biological species form outside their comfort zones. Theseinterdigitating edges are the richest places to look for ecological, evolu-tionary, and historical diversity. I live in north-central coastal Californiawhere, on the large geological scale of things, the great ancient northernand southern species assemblages intermix, producing extraordinarycomplexity. Our house is along a creek in a steep valley, where walkingup from the creek on either northern- or southern-facing hillsides putsone dramatically into changing ecologically mixed-species assemblages.Naturalcultural histories are written on the land, such that the formerplum orchards, sheep pastures, and logging patterns vie with geologicalsoil types and humidity changes to shape today’s human and nonhumaninhabitants of the land.19TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd217




Furthermore, as Juanita Sundberg analyzes for the cultural politicsof conservation encounters in the Maya Biosphere Preserve, conservationprojects have become important zones of encounter and contact shapedby distant and near actors.20Such contact zones are full of the complexi-ties of diﬀerent kinds of unequal power that do not always go in expecteddirections. In her beautiful book Friction,anthropologist Anna Tsing ex -plores the people and organisms enmeshed in conservation and justicestruggles in Indonesia in recent decades. Her chapter on “weediness” isa moving, incisive analysis of the wealth and species diversity of nature-cultures shaped by swidden agriculture into so-called secondary forests,which are being replaced by legal and illegal logging and industrial-scalemonocropping in a violent reshaping of landscapes and ways of life. Shelovingly documents the threatened collecting and naming practices ofher elder friend and informant Uma Adang. The contact zones of speciesassemblages, both human and nonhuman, are the core reality in her eth -nography. As Tsing puts it in an essay that tracks mushrooms in order toform a sense of the webs of world history, “Species interdependence is awell known fact—except when it comes to humans. Human exceptional-ism blinds us.” Riveted on stories either praising or damning human con-trol of nature, people so blinkered assume that human nature, no matterhow culturally various in detail, is essentially—often stated as “biologi-cally”—constant, whereas human beings reshape others, from molecule toecosystem. Rethinking “domestication” that closely knots human beingswith other organisms, including plants, animals, and microbes, Tsing asks,“What if we imagined a human nature that shifted historically togetherwith varied webs of interspecies dependence?” Tsing calls her webs ofinterdependence “unruly edges.” She continues, “Human nature is an inter-species relationship.”21With Tsing’s approval, I would add that the same istrue of dogs, and it is the human–dog entanglement that rules my think-ing about contact zones and fertile unruly edges in this chapter.In a sibling spirit, anthropologist Eduardo Kohn explores multi-species contact zones in Ecuador’s Upper Amazon region. Doing ethnog-raphy among the Quechua-speaking Runa and the various animals withwhom they craft their lives, Kohn tracks naturalcultural, political, ecolog-ical, and semiotic entanglements in species assemblages in which dogs arecentral actors. He writes, “Amazonian personhood, very much the product218dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




of interaction with nonhuman semiotic selves, is also the product of acertain kind of colonial subjection. . . . This essay looks particularly to cer-tain techniques of shamanistic metamorphosis (itself a product of inter-acting, and in the process blurring, with all kinds of nonhuman selves)and how this changes the terms of subjection (bodies are very diﬀerentkinds of entities in this part of the world) and delineates certain spacesof political possibility.”22Cayenne and I have no access to shamanisticmetamorphoses, but reworking form to make a kind of one out of two isthe sort of metaplasmic rearrangement we sought.Thinking about metamorphosis and suﬀering in a state of arresteddevelopment with Cayenne in the yellow-paint swatch of the A-frame, Icomforted myself with the reassurance that most of the transformativethings in life happen in contact zones. And so I turned for insight tothe phenomena of reciprocal induction studied in developmental biology.As a graduate student in Yale’s Biology Department in the s, I stud-ied morphogenetic interactions through which cells and tissues of adeveloping embryo reciprocally shape each other through cascades ofchemical–tactile communications. The techniques to track these complexinteractions and the imagination to build better theoretical concepts havebecome very powerful over the last twenty years. Scott Gilbert’s severaleditions of Developmental Biology,starting in , are a wonderful site totrack a growing grasp of the centrality of reciprocal induction, throughwhich organisms are structured by the mutual coshaping of the fates ofcells.23The point is that contact zones are where the action is, and currentinteractions change interactions to follow. Probabilities alter; topologiesmorph; development is canalized by the fruits of reciprocal induction.24Contact zones change the subject—all the subjects—in surprising ways.Interactions among taxonomically distinct organisms, in which struc- tures in one organism do not develop normally without properly timedinteractions with other associated organisms, are at the heart of a recenttheoretical and experimental synthesis in biology called ecological devel-opmental biology, in which Gilbert has been a key player.25For example,Margaret McFall-Ngai has shown that the sacs housing luminescentVibriobacteria on the adult squid Euprymna scolopesdo not develop un -less juvenile squid acquire an infection from the bacteria, resulting in acascade of developmental events producing the ﬁnal receptacles for theTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd219




symbionts.26Similarly, human gut tissue cannot develop normally withoutcolonization by its bacterial ﬂora. Earth’s beings are prehensile, oppor-tunistic, ready to yoke unlikely partners into something new, somethingsymbiogenetic. Co-constitutive companion species and coevolution are therule, not the exception. Ecological and evolutionary developmental biol-ogy are ﬁelds that could form a rich contact zone with feminist philoso-phers, theoretical physicists, and science studies scholars Karen Barad,with her framework of agential realism and intra-action, and AstridSchrader, with her approach to intra- and interspecies ontologies.27Perhaps my problems in the contact zones of agility have neuroti-cally induced too large a deviation into other kinds of unruly edges to re -assure me that something good comes from repeated failures to commu-nicate across asymmetrical diﬀerence. Nonetheless, all the elements forretraining Cayenne’s and my contact zones are now assembled.First, let us consider the question of relations of authority in thereciprocal inductions of training. Agility is a human-designed sport; it isnot spontaneous play, although this chapter will return to play soon. Ithink I have good reasons for judging that Cayenne loves to do agility; sheplants her bum in front of the gate to the practice yard with ﬁerce intentuntil I let her in to work patterns with me. On the mornings when we aredriving to a trial, she tracks the gear and stays by the car with commandin her eye. It’s not just the pleasure of an excursion or access to a playspace. We do nothing else in the agility yard but work on the obstacle pat-terns; that is the yard she wants access to. Spectators comment on the joyCayenne’s runs make them feel because they feel her whole self throwninto the skilled inventiveness of her course. This dog is easily annoyed byfood rewards, for example, when given during her intense sit–stay at thestart line before the release word to begin the run, when what she wantsis to ﬂy over the course. The run is her chief positive reinforcement. Sheis a working dog with great focus; her whole mind–body changes whenshe gains access to her scene of work. However, I would be a liar to claimthat agility is a utopia of equality and spontaneous nature. The rules arearbitrary for both species; that is what a sport is; namely, a rule-bound,skilled, comparatively evaluated performance. The dog and the humanare ruled by standards that they must submit to but that are not of theirown choosing. The courses are designed by human beings; people ﬁll out220dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




the entry forms and enter classes. The human decides for the dog whatthe acceptable criteria of performance will be.But there is a hitch: The human must respond to the authorityof the dog’s actual performance. The dog has already responded to thehuman’s incoherence. The real dog—not the fantasy projection of self—is mundanely present; the invitation to response has been tendered. Fixedby the specter of yellow paint, the human must ﬁnally learn to ask afundamental ontological question, one that puts human and dog togetherin what philosophers in the Heideggerian tradition called “the open”:Who are you, and so who are we? Here we are, and so what are we tobecome?28Early casualties of taking this question seriously became some of myfavorite stories about freedom and nature. These were stories I wantedCayenne and me to inhabit for life but turned out to produce painful in -coherence in our intra-actions, especially for her. Criteria of performanceTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd221

Cartoon by James Liddle from Agility Trials and Tribulations.Reprinted with permission ofthe publisher, Howln Moon Press.




on an A-frame are not natural to either dogs or people but are achieve-ments dependent on invented as well as inherited naturalcultural possibil-ities. I could think that playing agility just makes space for a dog’s naturalabilities when she sails over jumps (that turned out not to be preciselytrue either), but ﬁxing mistakes on the A-frame forced me to confront thepedagogical apparatuses of training, including their relations of freedomand authority. Some radical animal people are critical of any human train-ing “of” another critter. (I insist “with” is possible.) What I see as politemanners and beautiful skill acquired by the dogs I know best, they regardas strong evidence of excessive human control and a sign of the degrada-tion of domestic animals. Wolves, say the critics of trained animals, aremore noble (natural) than dogs precisely because they are more indiﬀer-ent to the doings of people; to bring animals into close interaction withhuman beings infringes their freedom. From this point of view, training isantinatural domination made palatable by liver cookies.Behaviorists are notoriously cavalier about what constitutes natural(biologically meaningful) behavior in an organism (human or not); theyleave that preserve to the ethologists and their descendants. For behav-iorists, if the probability of an action can be changed, no matter howmeaningless the bit of action may be to the organism or anybody else,then that action is fodder for the technologies of operant conditioning.Partly because of this agnosticism deep in the history of behaviorismabout both functionality (related to adaptation and so evolutionary the-ory) and meaning to the animal (tied to the question of interiority),Karen Pryor and other trainers of so-called wild animals in captivity, suchas dolphins and tigers, have been accused either of ruining them by in-troducing nonnaturalistic behaviors or of making critters into robots bytreating them as stimulus-response machines. Pryor and other positivetrainers answer that their work improves the lives of captive animals andshould become part of normal management and environmental enrich-ment.29Engaging in training (education) is interesting for animals, just asit is for people, whether or not a just-so story about contributing to repro-ductive ﬁtness can be made to ﬁt the curriculum.I rather like the idea that training with an animal, whether the crit-ter is named wild or domestic, can be part of disengaging from the semi-otics and technologies of compulsory reproductive biopolitics. That’s a222dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




project I like to see in human schools too. Functionless knowing can comevery close to the grace of play and a poiesis of love. I would, of course,be aghast at the idea that behaviorism has a corner on potentially playfulpedagogical approaches for any critters, including people. From this pointof view, an irony infusing the life-interest-enhancing and managementwork of behaviorist trainers in zoos and other captive animal facilities isthat one of the few remaining powerful justiﬁcations oﬀered for theseplaces is that they are essential to keep the individuals and species intheir care from extinction in their vanishing habitats. Animals in zoos,for all their dabbling in the rewards of behaviorism, have never been moreenmeshed in compulsory reproductive biopolitics than they are in thetwenty-ﬁrst century!I must admit, however, that the ironies of queer politics are notthe reason I train seriously with Cayenne for daily life and for sport. Ormaybe queer politics, if not all the ironies, are at the heart of agility train-ing: The coming into being of something unexpected, something newand free, something outside the rules of function and calculation, some-thing not ruled by the logic of the reproduction of the same, iswhat train-ing with each other is about.30That, I believe, is one of the meaningsof naturalthat the trained people and dogs I know practice. Trainingrequires calculation, method, discipline, science, but training is for open-ing up what is not known to be possible, but might be, for all the intra-acting partners. Training is, or can be, about diﬀerences not tamed bytaxonomy.Throughout my academic life, whether as a biologist or a scholarin the humanities and social sciences, I had looked down on behaviorismas a vapid science at best, hardly real biology at all, and an ideological,determinist discourse at heart. All of a sudden, Cayenne and I neededwhat skilled behaviorists could teach us. I became subject to a knowledgepractice I had despised. I had to understand that behaviorism is not mycaricature of a mechanistic pseudoscience fueled by niche-marketed foodtreats, but a ﬂawed, historically situated, and fruitful approach to mate-rial–semiotic questions in the ﬂeshly world. This science has addressedmy questions, and I think also Cayenne’s. I needed not only behavior-ism but also ethology and the more recent cognitive sciences. I had tocomprehend that comparative cognitive ethologists do not operate withTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd223




a cartoon of animal machinic nonminds whipped into computationalshape with math and computers.Preoccupied with the baleful eﬀects that the denialof human con-trol and power in training relationships has on dogs, I have understressedso far another aspect of the human obligation to respond to the author-ity of the dog’s actual performance. A skilled human competitor in agility,not to mention a decent life companion, must learn to recognize whentrustis what the human owes the dog. Dogs generally recognize very wellwhen the human being has earned trust; the human beings I know, start-ing with myself, are less good at reciprocal trust. I lose Cayenne and memany qualifying scores because, in the sport’s idiom, I “overhandle” herperformance. For example, because I am not conﬁdent, I do not see thatshehas mastered the diﬃcult correct entries into weave poles at speedand that I do not need to rush to do a front cross, thereby, as often asnot, blocking her path. Indeed, when I trust Cayenne I do not ever needto rush, no matter the pattern or obstacle. I do not need to be as fast asshe is (good thing!); I merely need to be as honest. In one diﬃcult run inan Excellent Standard class at an AKC trial in which most high-levelcompetitors ahead of us were missing their weave pole entry, I failed myobligation to recognize and respond to Cayenne’s earned authority, andI imposed my bent-over, anxious, controlling self in her path about twofeet from the ﬁrst pole. Laughing and chiding me afterward, my friendsdescribed what she did to get me out of the way and save our qualifyingscore. According to our observers, Cayenne saw me coming, clipped hersmoothly curving stride slightly, and dodged around me, all but shouting,“Get out of my way!” while she slipped magically between poles one andtwo and wove very fast without break in rhythm through the twelve poles.In my mind’s ear, I heard my agility teacher Gail Frazier telling me overand over, “Trust your dog!”Honesty and response to the dog’s authority take many forms. True,I do not need to be as fast as she is, but I do need to stay in as good phys-ical condition as I can, practice patterning my body at speed (thus, allthose choreographed aerobics classes at the gym!), cross train (I do a lotmore balanced exercise of all kinds than I would if I did not owe bodilycoherence to Cayenne), be willing to learn to make moves on the ﬁeld thatgive her better information even if those moves are hard for me to master,224dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




and treat her like a full adult by not bending over and hovering at diﬃcultparts of a course. I hear my astute instructor Lauri Plummer in last week’sclass tell me that once again I was bent over playing nursemaid in a sec-tion of the course that sapped my conﬁdence but not Cayenne’s. “Standup straight!” is a mantra that agility teachers repeat endlessly to theirrecalcitrant human students. I believe this chant is necessary because wedo not actually recognize our dogs’ authority but, in spite of our best in -tentions, treat them too often like athletic toddlers in fur coats. It is hardnot to do that when dog culture in America, even in agility, relentlesslyrefers to human partners as “mom” or “dad.” “Handler” is only a little bet-ter; that word makes me think that human agility partners imagine theyhave their controlling hands on the helm of nature in the body of ourdogs. Humans in agility are not handlers (nor are they guardians); theyare members of a cross-species team of skilled adults. With an ear to thetones of asymmetrical but often directionally surprising authority in con-tact zones, I like “partner” much better.The mixed practices of training require savvy travels in sciencesand stories about how animals actually feel and think as well as behave.TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd225

Cartoon by James Liddle from Agility Trials and Tribulations.Reprinted with permission ofthe publisher, Howln Moon Press.




Trainers can’t forbid themselves the judgment that they can communicatemeaningfully with their partners. The philosophic and literary conceitthat all we have is representations and no access to what animals thinkand feel is wrong. Human beings do, or can, know more than we usedto know, and the right to gauge that knowledge is rooted in historical,ﬂawed, generative cross-species practices. Of course, we are not the “other”and so do not know in that fantastic way (body snatching? ventriloquism?channeling?). In addition, through patient practices in biology, psychol-ogy, and the human sciences, we have learned that we are not the “self”or “transparently present to the self” either, and so we should expect notranscendent knowledge from that source. Disarmed of the fantasy ofclimbing into heads, one’s own or others’, to get the full story from theinside, we can make some multispecies semiotic progress. To claim notto be able to communicate with and to know one another and other crit-ters, however imperfectly, is a denial of mortal entanglements (the open)for which we are responsible and in which we respond. Technique, cal-culation, method—all are indispensable and exacting. But they are not226dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE

Cayenne and I at an agility trial in 2006. Copyright Richard Todd Photographer. Publishedwith permission.




response, which is irreducible to calculation. Response is comprehendingthat subject-making connection is real. Response is face-to-face in thecontact zone of an entangled relationship. Response is in the open. Com-panion species know this.So, I learned to be at ease with the artiﬁciality, the naturalculturalart, of training for a sport with a dog. But surely, I imagined, she could befree oﬀthe course, free to roam the woods and visit the oﬀ-leash parks.I had taught her an obligatory recall that authorized that freedom, and Iwas as nasty as any novice trainer feeling her oats about people who haveno idea how to teach a good recall and whose clueless dogs give a badname to freedom and an unfair fright to ﬂeeing deer.31I watched how myfellow agility competitor and friend Pam Richards trained with Cayenne’slittermate brother, Cappuccino, and I was secretly critical of how relent-lessly she worked with Capp to ﬁx his attention on her and hers on himin the activities of daily life. I knew Capp was aglow with pleasure in hisdoings, but I thought Cayenne had the greater animal happiness.32I knewPam and Capp were achieving things in agility out of our reach, and I wasproud of them. Then, Pam took pity on us. Taking the risk to judge thatI actually wanted to become less incoherent with Cayenne, she oﬀered toshow me in detail what we did not know. I became subject to Pam so thatCayenne could become free and lucid in ways not admitted by my exist-ing stock of freedom stories.33Pam is nothing if not thorough. She backed us up, forbidding meto put Cayenne on the A-frame in competition until she and I knew ourjobs. She showed me that I had not “proofed” the obstacle performance inabout a dozen fundamental ways. And so I set about actually teachingwhat the release word meant instead of fantasizing that Cayenne was anative English speaker. I started thinking practically about adding dis-tractions to make the “two-on, two-off” performance that I had chosenfor us more certain in circumstances approximating the intense world oftrials. I learned to send her over the A-frame to the bottom and the magictwo-on, two-oﬀpaw position, no matter where I was, no matter if I wasmoving or still, no matter if toys and food were ﬂying through the air andcomplicitous friends of various species were jumping up and down crazily.Pam watched us and then sent us back again with the mordant commentthat Cayenne did not yet know her job because I had not yet taught it.TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd227




Finally, she said I was suﬃciently coherent and Cayenne suﬃciently knowl-edgeable that we could do the A-frame in competition—if I held the samestandard of performance there that had become normal in training. Con-sequences, that sledge hammer of behaviorism, were the point. If, by let-ting Cayenne go on to the next obstacle, I rewarded a legally adequateperformance in the contact zone, but one that did not match our hard-woncriterion, I was condemning her and me to a lifetime of frustration andloss of conﬁdence in each other. If Cayenne did not hold two-on, two-oﬀand wait for release, I was to walk her calmly oﬀthe course without com-ment or glance and zip her into her crate without reward and stroll away.If I did not do that, I had less respect for Cayenne than for my fantasies.For more than two years, we had not advanced out of novice com-petition levels because of the A-frame contact zone. Subject to Pam’snarratives of freedom and authority, after Cayenne and I had retrainedeach other more honestly I walked her oﬀthe course at a real trial onceand was given a year of perfect contacts after that. My friends cheered usover the ﬁnish line in our last novice event as if we had won the WorldCup. “All” we had done was achieve a little coherence. The occasionalbreakdowns in that contact zone that still happen are quickly ﬁxed, andCayenne sails through this performance with a gleam in her eye and plea-sure written all over her coursing body. Among other competitors, she isknown for great contacts. A random reinforcement schedule doesn’t hurt,but Cayenne’s love of the game—love of work—is our real salvation.But what about Cayenne’s independent animal happiness oﬀthecourse compared with the bond of attention between Pam and Capp?Here, I think Pam and I have changed each other’s narratives and prac-tices of freedom and joy. I had to face the need for many more “I payattention to you; you pay attention to me” games to ﬁll Cayenne’s and mynot-so-leisure hours. I had to deal with my sense of paradise lost whenCayenne became steadily and vastly more interested in me than in otherdogs.34The price of the intensifying bond between us was, well, a bond. Istill notice this; it still feels like a loss as well as an achievement of largespiritual and physical joy for both Cayenne and me. Ours is not an inno-cent, unconditional love; the love that ties us is a naturalcultural practicethat has redone us molecule by molecule. Reciprocal induction is thename of the game.228dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




Pam, for her part, tells me she admires the sheer fun in Cayenne’sand my doings. She knows that can exact a price on performance criteria.The gods regularly laugh when Pam and I take Cayenne and Cappuccinoout to a grassy ﬁeld and urge them to play with each other and ignore us.Pam’s partner, Janet, will even leave a riveting women’s basketball gameon TV to revel in the unmatchable joy when Cayenne and Cappuccinoplay together. All too frequently, Cayenne can’t get Capp to play; he haseyes only for Pam’s throwing arm and the ball she has hidden away. Butwhen they do play, when Cayenne solicits her littermate long and hardenough, with all the metacommunicative skill at her command, they in -crease the stock of beauty in the world. Then, three human women andtwo dogs are in the open.Thinking about how animals and human beings who train togetherbecome “available to events,” Vinciane Despret suggests that “the wholematter is a matter of faith, of trust, and this is the way we should construethe role of expectations, the role of authority, the role of events thatauthorize and make things become.”35She describes what has been foundin studies of skilled human riders and educated horses. The French ethol-ogist Jean-Claude Barrey’s detailed analysis of “unintentional movements”in skilled riding show that homologous muscles ﬁre and contract in bothhorse and human at precisely the same time. The term for this phenom-enon is isopraxis.Horses and riders are attuned to each other. “Talentedriders behave and move like horses. . . . Human bodies have been trans-formed by and into a horse’s body. Who inﬂuences and who is inﬂuenced,in this story, are questions that can no longer receive a clear answer.Both, human and horse, are cause and eﬀect of each other’s movements.Both induce and are induced, aﬀect and are aﬀected. Both embody eachother’s mind.”36Reciprocal induction; intra-action; companion species.37A good run in agility has very similar properties. Mimetic matching ofmuscle groups is not usually the point, although I am sure it occurs insome agility patterns, because the dog and the human are coperforminga course spatially apart from each other in diﬀerently choreographed andemergent patternings. The nonmimetic attunement of each to each res-onates with the molecular scores of mind and ﬂesh and makes some-one out of them both who was not there before. Training in the contactzone, indeed.TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd229




Daemon TearApril , Dear Agility Friends,In practice a couple of weeks ago with Rob nearWatsonville, Cayenne and I had an interesting experiencethat I suspect you can relate to. The class is at night, –:,and has a dozen teams in it; in short, the class is big andsometimes a bit chaotic, and many of us are bone tired bythen anyway. Many nights, my concentration is iﬀy, but thatnight both Cayenne and I were glued to each other’s soulsand did not make a mistake over several runs with diﬃcultsequences and discriminations. Then at :, we had our lastrun, one with only ten obstacles, albeit with a couple of chal-lenging discriminations, one of the themes of the night.None of these had given us any trouble. We did ﬁne until thelast discrimination in the last run. In a nanosecond, we cameapart, literally, and each went a diﬀerent way. We eachstopped instantly, no longer on the same course, and lookedat each other with a blatantly confused look on her dog andmy human face, eyes questioning, each body–mind bereft ofits partner. I swear I heard a sound like Velcro ripping whenwe came apart. We were no longer “whole.” I turned on time,in the right spot, and had all my parts technically correct;Cayenne turned well and correctly too. Then, we just losteach other. Period. It was not a “technical” mistake for eitherof us, I swear. Rob saw nothing wrong and did not knowwhat happened. I swear Cayenne and I both heard theVelcro ripping when our cross-species conjoined mind–body,which we are when we run well, came apart. I’ve experiencedlosing her mentally before, of course, as she has me. Almostalways, the actual literal error of a course—usually a tiny butfatal glitch in timing—is a symptom of such a loss of eachother. But this was diﬀerent—much more intense—maybebecause we were both tired and we had been unconsciouslybut strongly linked all night. She looked abandoned, and Ifelt abandoned. I experienced the confused look we gave each230dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




other to be full of loss and yearning, and I truly think thatwas what her expressive canine being was screaming too. Ithink the communication between us was as unambiguous asa play bow would be in its context. Just as a play bow bindsresponding partners to take the risk of playing, somehow weunbound each other from the game. Something severed us.All of this happened in much less than a second.Have you read the Philip Pullman series, GoldenCompass,Subtle Knife,and Amber Spyglass,in which ahuman–daemon link is a main part of the ﬁctional world?The daemon is an animal familiar essential to the human,and vice versa, and the link is so strong and necessary tobeing whole that its deliberate severing is the violent crimedriving the plot. At one point, the narrator says, “Will, too,felt the pain where his daemon had been, a scalded place ofacute tenderness that each breath tore at with cold hooks”(Amber Spyglass,). Earlier, the narrator described thecrime of severing daemon and human: “While there is aconnection, of course, the link remains. Then the blade isbrought down between them, severing the link at once. Theyare then separate entities” (Golden Compass,).38Surely, I am dramatizing the rip between Cayenne andme over a little agility discrimination—tire or jump?—lateon a rainy Wednesday night in March in a central Californiahorse arena. Yet, this tiny tear in the fabric of being told mesomething precious about the weave of the whole-selvescommitment that can bind companion species in a game ofconjoined living, in which each is more than one but lessthan two. We trained hard—for years, actually—to developthis kind of link; but both its coming into being and itscoming apart are only made possible by that discipline, notmade by it.Does all that make any sense?Coming apart in Sonoma County,DonnaTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd231




PLAYING WITH STRANGERSAgility is a sport and a kind of game that is built on the tie of cross-species work and play. I have said a lot about work so far but too littleabout play. It is rare to meet a puppy who does not know how to play;such a youngster would be seriously disturbed. Most, but not all, adultdogs know very well how to play too, and they choose doggish or otherplay partners selectively throughout their lives if they have the opportu-nity. Agility people know that they need to learn to play with their dogs.Most want to play with their canine partners if for no other reason thanto take advantage of the tremendous tool that play is in positive-trainingpractices. Play builds powerful aﬀectional and cognitive bonds betweenpartners, and permission to play is a hugely valuable reward for correctlyfollowing cues for both dogs and people. Most agility people want tocavort with their dogs for the sheer joy of it too. Nonetheless, astonish-ingly, a great many agility people have no idea how to play with a dog;they require remedial instruction, beginning with learning how to respondto real-life dogs rather than fantasy children in fur coats or humanoidpartners in doubles tennis.39Better at understanding what someone isactually doing than people are, dogs can be pretty good teachers in thisregard. But discouraged dogs who have given up on their people’s abilityto learn to play with them politely and creatively are not rare. People haveto learn how to pay attention and to communicate meaningfully, or theyare shut out of the new worlds that play proposes. Not so oddly, with-out the skills of play, adults of both the canine and hominid persuasionare developmentally arrested, deprived of key practices of ontological andsemiotic invention. In the language of developmental biology, they becomevery bad at reciprocal induction. Their contact zones degenerate into im -poverishing border wars.I suggest people must learn to meet dogs as strangers ﬁrst in orderto unlearn the crazy assumptions and stories we all inherit about who dogsare. Respect for dogs demands at least that much. So, how do strangerslearn to play with each other? First, a story.“Saﬁtaught Wister to jaw wrestle, like a dog, and she even convincedhim to carry a stick around in his mouth, although he never seemed tohave a clue what to do with it. Wister enticed Saﬁinto high-speed chases,and they’d disappear over the hills together, looking for all the world like232dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




a wolf hunting her prey. Occasionally, apparently accidentally, he knockedher with a hoof, and she would cry out in pain. Whenever this occurred,Wister would become completely immobile, allowing Saﬁto leap up andwhack him several times on the snout with her head. This seemed to beSaﬁ’s way of saying, ‘You hurt me!’ and Wister’s way of saying, ‘I didn’tmean it.’ Then they would resume playing. After they tired of racing,Saﬁoften rolled over on her back under Wister, exposing her vulnerablebelly to his lethal hooves in an astonishing display of trust. He nuzzledher tummy and used his enormous incisors to nibble her favorite scratch-ing spot, just above the base of her tail, which made Saﬁclose her eyesin bliss.”40Saﬁwas bioanthropologist Barbara Smuts’s eighty-pound Germanshepherd–Belgian sheepdog mix, and Wister was a neighbor’s donkey.Meeting in a remote part of Wyoming, dog and donkey lived near eachother for ﬁve months. Wister was no fool; he knew his ancestors werelunch for Saﬁ’s ancestors. Around other dogs, Wister took precautions,braying loudly and kicking threateningly. He certainly did not invite theminto predator chases for fun. When he ﬁrst saw Saﬁ, he charged her andkicked. But, Smuts relates, Saﬁhad a long history of befriending crittersfrom cats and ferrets to squirrels, and she set to work on Wister, her ﬁrstlarge herbivore buddy, soliciting and inviting, skillfully and repeatedly, untilhe took the great leap to risk an oﬀ-category friendship.Of course, the kind of predators dogs are know how to read in detailthe kind of prey donkeys are and vice versa. Evolutionary history makesthat plain. The panorama of pastoral economies in human–animal histo-ries also testiﬁes to this fact; dogs have herded sheep and other chlorophyll-chomping species in a wide range of naturalcultural ecologies.41The wholeprocess would not work if sheep did not know how to understand dogsas well as dogs know how to interpret them. Herbivores and canines havealso learned to work together in other ways that depend not on predator–prey semiotics but on the sharable meanings and practices of social bond-ing and territory identiﬁcation. Livestock guardian dogs and their her-bivorous charges and companions testify to this skill. But the fully adultSaﬁand Wister played together by raiding their predator–prey reper-toire, dis aggregating it, recombining it, changing the order of action pat-terns, adopting each other’s behavioral bits, and generally making thingsTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd233




happen that did not ﬁt anybody’s idea of function, practice for past orfuture lives, or work. Dog and donkey weren’t precisely strangers at thestart, but they were hardly conspeciﬁc littermates or cross-species part-ners given to inhabiting one member’s fantasy of unconditional love. Dogand donkey had to craft atypical ways to interpret each other’s speciﬁcﬂuencies and to reinvent their own repertoires through aﬀective semioticintra-action.I contorted sentences into knots in the last few paragraphs to avoidusing the word languagefor what is happening in play. Too much weighthas been loaded on to questions and idioms of language in consideringthe doings of the great variety of animals and people alike.42Especially forthinking about world making and intelligent intra-action among beingslike dogs and donkeys, to ask if their cognitive, communicative skillsdo or do not qualify for the imprimatur of language is to fall into a dan-gerous trap. People always end up better at language than animals, nomatter how latitudinarian the framework for thinking about the matter.The history of philosophy and of science is crisscrossed with lines drawnbetween Human and Animal on the basis of what counts as language.Also, the history of training in agility is littered with the dire conse-quences of people thinking dogs mean the same thing by words and theircombinations that human beings do.I am not uninterested in the lively theoretical work and empiricalresearch going on these days in regard to questions about language touch-ing human and nonhuman animals. There is no doubt that many animalsacross a wide range of species, including rodents, primates, canids, andbirds, do things few scientists expected them to be able to do (or hadﬁgured out howto recognize, partly because hardly anyone expected any-thing interesting to show up, at least not in testable, data-rich ways).43These recently documented talents fuel conversations and arguments inseveral sciences as well as popular culture about what counts as language.When even Noam Chomsky, long famous for his touching faith that thehard science of linguistics proves that people do it and animals don’t,becomes the object of his still pure colleagues’ ire for selling out, or at leastreconsidering the matter from another point of view and in the companyof odd new colleagues, we know something big is happening in evolu-tionary comparative cognitive sciences, and language is on the menu. In234dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




particular, MIT’s Chomsky and his Harvard colleagues, Marc Hauserand W. Tecumseh Fitch, said in print, “However, we argue that the avail-able data suggest a much stronger continuity between animals and humanswith respect to speech than previously believed. We argue that the con-tinuity hypothesis thus deserves the status of a null hypothesis, whichmust be rejected by comparative work before any claims of uniquenesscan be validated. For now, this null hypothesis of no truly novel traitsin the speech domain appears to stand.”44That nicely turns the tables onwhat has to be proved!Let us stay with the word continuityfor a moment, because I thinkit misrepresents the strength and radicalism of Chomsky, Hauser, andFitch’s resetting of what counts as the null hypothesis. Because the oddsingular words humanand animalare so lamentably common in scientiﬁcand popular idioms and so rooted in Western philosophical premises andhierarchical chains of being, continuityeasily implies that just one con-tinuum is replacing one chasm of diﬀerence. Hauser and his colleagues,however, belong to a tribe of comparative cognitive scientists and neuro-biologists who have thoroughly demolished that lame ﬁgure of diﬀerence.They disaggregate singulars into ﬁelds of rich diﬀerence, with many geo -metries of system and subsystem architecture and junctions and disjunc-tions of properties and capacities, whether at scales of diﬀerent species orof brain organization in a particular critter. It is no longer possible scien-tiﬁcally to compare something like “consciousness” or “language” amonghuman and nonhuman animals as if there were a singular axis of cali-bration.45Part of the radicalism of these powerful recent scientiﬁc com-parative evolutionary interdisciplines is that they do not invalidate askingabout consciousness and language. Rather, inquiry becomes inextricablyrich and detailed in the ﬂesh of complexity and nonlinear diﬀerence andits required semiotic ﬁgures. Encounters among human beings and otheranimals change in this web. Not least, people can stop looking for somesingle deﬁning diﬀerence between them and everybody else and under-stand that they are in rich and largely uncharted, material–semiotic, ﬂesh-to-ﬂesh, and face-to-face connection with a host of signiﬁcant others.That requires retraining in the contact zone.Similar to the question of language is the wrangling over whethercritters other than people have a “theory of mind,” that is, know that otherTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd235




beings have the same or similar sorts of motives and ideas that oneselfhas. Stanley Coren argues that “dogs . . . do seem to understand that othercreatures have their own points of view and mental processes.”46Coreninsists that this ability is highly advantageous for social species and forpredator–prey associates, and its development is likely to be greatly favoredby natural selection. He and others provide numerous descriptions andaccounts in which it seems both appropriate to acknowledge this capacityin many other species, including dogs, to recognize diﬀerent points ofview and also intellectually anorexic, indicating extreme epistemologicalfasting and narrative regurgitation, to assume the opposite.Nonetheless, exacting, comparative, experimental testing is, in myopinion, extremely important, with the null hypothesis in force that thelack of the capacity is generally what has to be shown to a high degreeof statistical signiﬁcance if folks are expected to believe their dogs have no“minds” and no ability to take account of the “minds” of others. Preciselyspeciﬁed similarities ought to be the position that has to be refuted,rather than the opposite. What might possibly be meant by “mind” andby “recognizing another’s point of view,” of course, is at least as much atstake for people these days as for pooches. No single axis of diﬀerence,and so no single postulate of continuity, does justice to the motley of com-municating critters, including people and dogs. “Minds” are not all of thehuman sort, to say the least. Figuring out how to do the needed sorts ofexperimental work, in which heterogeneous material–semiotic entangle-ments are the norm, should be great fun and scientiﬁcally very creative.47That such acute work largely remains to be done gives a pretty good ideaabout how abstemious, if not frightened of otherness, researching andphilosophizing humans in Western traditions have been.Among beings who recognize one another, who respond to the pres-ence of a signiﬁcant other, something delicious is at stake. Or, as BarbaraSmuts put it after decades of careful scientiﬁc ﬁeld studies of baboonsand chimps, cetaceans, and dogs, copresence “is something we taste ratherthan something we use. In mutuality, we sense that inside this other body,there is ‘someone home,’ someone so like ourselves that we can co-createa shared reality as equals.”48In the contact zones I inhabit in agility, I amnot so sure about “equals”; I dread the consequences for signiﬁcant othersof pretending not to exercise power and control that shape relationships236dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




despite any denials. But I am sure about the taste of copresence and theshared building of other worlds.Still, the ﬁgures of language and mind do not take me to the kind ofinventiveness Cayenne and I experience in our game. Play is the practicethat makes us new, that makes us into something that is neither one nortwo, that brings us into the open where purposes and functions are givena rest. Strangers in mindful hominid and canid ﬂesh, we play with eachother and become signiﬁcant others to each other. The power of languageis purported to be its potentially inﬁnite inventiveness. True enough in atechnical sense (“discrete inﬁnity”); however, the inventive potency of playredoes beings in ways that should not be called language but that deservetheir own names. Besides, it is not potentially inﬁniteexpressiveness thatis interesting for play partners but, rather, unexpected and nonteleologi-cal inventions that can take mortal shape only within the ﬁnite and dis-similar naturalcultural repertoires of companion species. Another namefor those sorts of inventions is joy. Ask Saﬁand Wister.Gregory Bateson did not know that ﬁne dog and donkey, but hedid have a human daughter with whom he engaged in the risky practiceof play. Play is not outside the asymmetries of power, and both MaryCatherine and Gregory felt that force ﬁeld in their father–daughter con-tact zone in “Metalogue: About Games and Being Serious.”49They learnedto play in that force ﬁeld, not in some Eden outside it. Their play was lin-guistic, but what they had to say tracks what Cayenne and I learned to do,even if Wister and Saﬁremain undisputed masters of the art. Here’s howthis metalogue starts ():daughter: Daddy, are these conversations serious?father: Certainly they are.d: They’re not a sort of game that you play with me?f: God forbid . . . but they are a sort of game that we play together.d: Then they’re notserious!Then ensues their noninnocent playful investigation into what is playand what is serious and how they require each other for their reinventionof the world and for the grace of joy. Loosening the iron bit of logic, withall of its utterly functional ability to follow single tracks to their properends, is the ﬁrst step. Father says hopefully, “I think that we get some ideasTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd237




straight, and I think that the muddles help.” He says, “If we both spokelogically all the time we would never get anywhere” (). If you want tounderstand something new, you “have to break up all our ready-madeideas and shuﬄe the pieces” ().F and D are playing a game, but a game is not play. Games haverules. Agility has rules. Play breaks rules to make something else happen.Play needs rules but is not rule-deﬁned. You can’t play a game unless youinhabit this muddle. D ponders aloud, “I am wondering about our mud-dles. Do we have to keep the little pieces of our thought in some sort oforder—to keep from going mad?” F agrees, then adds, “But I don’t knowwhatsort of order” (). D complains that the rules are always changingwhen she plays with F. I know Cayenne and I have felt that way abouteach other. D: “The way you confuse everything—it’s sort of cheating.”F objects, “No, absolutely not” (). D worries, “But is it a game,Daddy?Do you play againstme?” Drawing on how a child and a parent playtogether with colored blocks, F aims for some sort of coherence: “No. Ithink of it as you and I playing against the building blocks” (). Is thisSaﬁand Wister’s playing against the rules of their species heritages? Isit Cayenne’s and my playing in the arbitrary swatch of yellow paint thatis our contact zone? F elaborates, “The blocks themselves make a sortof rules. They will balance in certain positions, and they will not balancein other positions” (). No glue allowed; that ischeating. Play is in theopen, not in the glue pot.Just when I thought I had it, F paraphrases D: “‘What sort of ordershould we cling to so that when we get into a muddle, we do not go mad?’”F answers his paraphrase, “It seems to me that the ‘rules’ of the game isonly another name for that sort of order.” D thinks that she now has theanswer, “Yes—and cheating is what gets us into muddles.” No rest for thewicked is F’s motto: “Except that the whole point of the game is that wedo get into muddles, and we do come out on the other side” (). Is thatwhat the playful practice of making mistakes interesting in agility train-ing helps us understand? Making mistakes is inevitable and not particu-larly illuminating; making mistakes interesting is what makes the worldnew. Cayenne and I have experienced that in rare and precious moments.We play with our mistakes; they give us that possibility. It all happensvery fast. F owns up, “Yes, it is I who make the rules—after all, I do not238dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




want us to go mad.” D is undeterred, “Is it youthat makes the rules,Daddy? Is that fair?” F is unrepentant, “Yes, daughter, I change them con-stantly. Not all of them, but some of them.” D: “I wish you’d tell me whenyou’re going to change them!” F: “I wish I could [he doesn’t really]. But itisn’t like that . . . certainly it is not like chess or canasta. It’s more like whatkittens and puppies do. Perhaps. I don’t know” (–).D jumps at this: “Daddy, why do kittens and puppies play?” Com-prehending that play is not fora purpose, F unapologetically, and I sus-pect triumphantly, brings this metalogue to a close: “I don’t know—Idon’t know” (). Or, as Ian Wedde said of Vincent, “He enriches myignorance.” And, as Wister said of Saﬁ: “I’ll give this dog a chance. Herconstant bowing might mean I am not lunch. I’d better not be mistaken,and she had better see that I have accepted her invitation. Otherwise, sheis one dead dog, and I am one savaged donkey.”So, we reach another point to which Bateson takes us: metacommu-nication, communication about communication, the sine qua non of play.Language cannot engineer this delicate matter; rather, language relies onthis other semiotic process, on this gestural, never literal, always implicit,corporeal invitation to risk copresence, to risk another level of communi-cation. Back to another metalogue. D: “Daddy, why cannot people just say‘I am not cross at you’ and let it go at that?” F: “Ah, now we are getting tothe real problem. The point is that messages we exchange in gestures arereally not the same as any translations of these gestures into words.”50Bateson also studied other mammals, including monkeys and dol-phins, for their play and their practices of metacommunication.51He wasnot looking for denotative messages, no matter how expressive; he waslooking for semiotic signs that said other signs do not mean what theyotherwise mean (as in a play gesture indicating that the following bit isnotaggression). These are among the kinds of signs that make relation-ships possible, and “preverbal” mammalian communication for Batesonwas mostly about “the rules and contingencies of relationship.”52In study-ing play, he was looking for things like a ritual bow followed by “ﬁghting”that is not ﬁghting and is known not to be ﬁghting by the participants(and by human observers who bother to learn something about the crit-ters they are privileged to watch). Play can occur only among those will-ing to risk letting go of the literal.53That is a big risk, at least for adultsTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd239




like Cayenne and me; those wonderful, joy-enticing signals like play bowsand feints usher us over the threshold into the world of meanings that donot mean what they seem to mean. That is not the linguist’s “discreteinﬁnity,” nor is it the comparative neurobiologist’s “continuity.” Rather, theworld of meanings loosed from their functions is the game of copresencein the contact zone. Not about reproducing the sacred image of the same,this game is nonmimetic and full of diﬀerence. Dogs are extremely goodat this game; people can learn.Biologist Marc Bekoﬀhas spent countless hours studying the playof canids, including dogs. Granting that play might sometimes serve afunctional purpose either at the time or later in life, Bekoﬀargues thatthat interpretation does not account for play or lead one even to recognizeits occurrence. Instead, Bekoﬀand his colleague J. A. Byers oﬀer a deﬁni-tion of play that encompasses “all motor activity performed postnatallythat appears to be purposeless, in which motor patterns from other con-texts may often be used in modiﬁed forms and altered temporal sequenc-ing.”54Like language, play rearranges elements into new sequences to makenew meanings. But play also requires something not explicit in Bekoﬀand Byer’s deﬁnition in the s, namely, joyin the sheer doing.55I thinkthat is what one means by “purposeless.” If “desire” in the psychoanalyticsense is proper only to human language–constituted subjects, then sensu-ous “joy” is what play-constituted beings experience. Like copresence, joyis something we taste, not something we know denotatively or use instru-mentally. Play makes an opening. Play proposes.I want to stay with altered temporal sequencing for a moment. Func-tional patterns put a pretty tight constraint on the sequence of actions intime: ﬁrst stalk; then run to outﬂank; then head, bunch, and cut out theselected prey; then lunge; then bite and kill; then dissect and tug. Thesequences in a serious conspeciﬁc ﬁght or in any other of the importantaction patterns for making a living are diﬀerent but no less sequentiallydisciplined. Play is not making a living; it discloses living. Time opens up.Play, like Christian grace, can allow the last to become ﬁrst, with joyfulresults. Ian Wedde’s reﬂections on his walks with Vincent the ridgebacktell me something about the temporal open that I and, I think, Cayenneexperience when we play together, whether choreographing the morestructured forms of an agility run, with its dance of rule and invention in240dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




the kinesthetic matching of two swiftly moving bodies, or the looser playpatterns we do with chase, wrestle, and tug. “I’m unsure about the theri-anthropism involved in pondering a dog’s sense of time—what I know isa degree of reciprocity in our shared experience of it. For me it came toinvolve pace, space and focal length, as well as duration and memory. Mysense of the present became more vivid; concurrently, Vincent’s percep-tual pace altered if he was required to share my speed. Our combinedtime contained my enhanced sense and his altered pace; we were bothﬁxed in vivid temporal foregrounds.”56In Cayenne’s and my experience of playing together, this play ofstrangers, both partners experience Wedde’s kind of altered temporalsense. Inside that jointly altered but still unidentical sense, time in thesense of sequencing also opens up. Unexpected conjunctions and coordi-nations of creatively moving partners in play take hold of both and putthem into an open that feels something like an eternal present or suspen-sion of time, a high of “getting it” together in action, or what I am callingjoy. No liver cookie can compete with that! Agility people often jokewith one another about their “addiction” to playing agility with their dogs.How can they possibly justify the thousands of hours, thousands of dol-lars, constant experiences of failure, public exposure of one’s foolishness,and repeated injuries? And what of their dogs’addiction? How can theirdogs possibly be so intensely ready all the timeto hear their human utterthe release word at the start line that frees them to ﬂy in coordinated ﬂowwith this two-legged sf alien across a ﬁeld of unknown obstacles? Thereis, after all, a lot that is not fun about the discipline of training for peopleor for dogs, not to mention the rigors of travel and the erosions of con-ﬁned boredom while waiting for one’s runs at an event. Yet, the dogs andthe people seem to egg each other on to the next run, the next experienceof what play proposes.Besides, joy is not the same thing as fun. I don’t think very manypeople and dogs would keep doing agility just for the fun; fun togetheris both unreliable in agility and more easily had elsewhere. I ask howCayenne can possibly know the diﬀerence between a good run and a medi -ocre one, such that her entire bodily being glows as if in the phosphores-cent ocean after we have ﬂown well together? She prances; she shinesfrom inside out; by contagion, she causesjoy all around her. So do otherTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd241




dogs, other teams, when they ﬂame into being in a “good run.” Cayenne ispleased enough with a mediocre run. She has a good time; after all, shestill gets string cheese and lots of aﬃrming attention. Mediocre runs ornot, I have a good time too. I’ve made valued human friends in agility; Iget to admire a great motley of dogs; and the days are uncluttered andpleasant. But Cayenne and I both know the diﬀerence when we havetasted the open. We both know the tear in the fabric of our joined becom-ing when we rip apart into merely functional time and separate move-ment after the joy of inventive isopraxis. The taste of “becoming with” inplay lures its apprentice stoics of both species back into the open of a vividsensory present. That’s why we do it. That’s the answer to my question,Who are you, and so who are we?Good players (watch any adept dog or reread Mary Catherine andGregory Bateson in their metalogue) have a sizable repertoire for invitingand sustaining their partners’ interest and engagement in the activity andfor calming any worries the partner may develop about lapses into theliteral meaning of alarming elements and sequences. Bekoﬀsuggests thatthese animal abilities to initiate, facilitate, and sustain joint “fair” play,where partners can take risks to propose something even more over-the-top and out-of-order than the players have yet ventured together, under-lie the evolution of justice, cooperation, forgiveness, and morality.57Remember Wister’s letting Saﬁwhack him with her snout when the don-key had accidentally caught the dog’s head with an overly exuberant hoof.I remember also how many times in training with Cayenne, when I amincoherent and hurtful instead of inviting and responsive, that I describewhat I feel from her as her forgiveness and her readiness to engage again.I experience that same forgiveness in play with her outside formal train-ing when I misinterpret her invitations, preferences, or alarms. I knowperfectly well that I am “anthropomorphizing” (as well as theriomorphiz-ing) in this way of saying things, but notto say them in this manner seemsworse, in the sense of being both inaccurate and impolite.58Bekoﬀis direct-ing our attention to the astonishing and world-changing naturalculturalevolution of what we call trust. For myself, I am also partial to the idea thatthe experience of sensual joy in the nonliteral open of play might under-lie the possibility of morality and responsibility for and to one another inall of our undertakings at whatever webbed scales of time and space.242dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




So, at the end of“Training in the Contact Zone,” I return to IsabelleStengers, whom we met in chapter , “Sharing Suﬀering,” in her intro-duction of the idea of cosmopolitics, which requires copresence. I needStengers here for her reading of Whitehead’s notion of a proposition. Inher paper titled “Whitehead’s Account of the Sixth Day,” Stengers writes,“Propositions are members of the short metaphysical list of what canbe said to exist, what is required by the description of actual entities assuch. . . . The coming into existence of new propositions may need, anddoes need, a social environment, but it will not be explained in social terms.The event of this coming into existence marks the opening of a full rangeof new diverging possibilities for becoming, and as such generally signiﬁesa break in continuity, what can be called a social upheaval.”59I risk thisexcursion into speculative process philosophy and Whitehead’s vocabu-lary, this other playing with strangers, in the same spirit that I approachtraining with my partners in the contact zones of agility. Stengers saysthat the conceptual role of Whitehead’s technical terms lies in “the imag-inative jump produced by their articulation. . . . their meaning cannotbe elucidated right away, just as an animal cannot be approached rightaway. In both cases you need some slowing down and learning what theydemand and how they behave” (). It is a case of conceptual politesse, ofcosmopolitics, this learning to play with strangers.I said that “play proposes,” and I argued that people must learn tomeet dogs as strangers, as signiﬁcant others, so that both can learn thecorporeal semiosis of cross-species trust and enter the open of riskingsomething new. Agility is an ordinary sport or a game, in which the syn-copated dance of rule and invention is the choreography that reshapesplayers. I know that Whitehead did not have dog–human agility runs inmind when he elaborated his sense of a proposition, but Stengers is morepromisingly promiscuous in her love of the speculative work and playof propositions. Emboldened by Stengers, I suggest that a “good run” inagility is a “mode of coherence,” a “concrescence of prehensions,” and anevent of “profound disclosure”—all in Whitehead’s terms.For Whitehead, coherence means interpreting together what hadbeen seen only in mutually contradicting terms. Stengers quotes White-head, “In the becoming of an actual entity, the potential unity of manyentities in disjunctive diversity acquires the real unity of an actual entity”TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd243




().60An achieved actual entity is outside time; it exceeds time in some-thing I will call the sheer joy of that coming together of diﬀerent bodiesin coshaping motion, that “getting it,” which makes each partner morethan one but less than two. An actual entity increases the multiplicity ofthe world: “The many have become one, and are increased by one” ().This is ordinary reciprocal induction. “Becoming is not to be demon-strated; it is a matter of sheer disclosure. In contrast, the question of‘howan entity becomes’ is the one for which a demand for coherence may bepositively put to work” (). Reasons, experiments, training hard, makingmistakes interesting, objectivity, causes, method, sociology and psychol-ogy, consequences: here is where these things come into their own. Humanbeings (and other organisms) need the ﬂeshly practice of reason, needreasons, need technique, but, unless they are delusional, and many are,what people (and other organisms) do not have (except in a very specialsense in mathematical and logical proof) is transcendent suﬃcient reasons.The open beckons; the next speculative proposition lures; the worldis not ﬁnished; the mind–body is not a giant computational exercise buta risk in play. That’s what I learned as a biologist; that’s what I learn againin the contact zones of agility. People must not explain away by tautol-ogy—just-so stories of relentless function—what needs to be understood,that is, disclosed. I think Stengers agrees with me that the same thingapplies across species.If we appreciate the foolishness of human exceptionalism, then weknow that becoming is always becoming with—in a contact zone wherethe outcome, where who is in the world, is at stake. “For Whitehead, theexperiences which come to matter on the sixth day are those which maybe associated with the intense feeling of alternative, unrealized possibili-ties” (). Stengers insists that philosophy aims at transformative disclo-sure and that the eﬃcacy of propositions is not limited to human beings.“Propositions should not be confused with linguistic sentences. . . . Theeﬃcacy of propositions is not restricted to creatures of the sixth day. . . .Propositions are needed in order to give their irreducible reasons . . .for the possibility of the kind of disruption of social continuity we mayobserve when even oysters or trees seem to forget about survival” ().A proposition is about something that is not yet. A proposition is a socialadventure, lured by unrealized ideals (called “abstractions”) and enabled244dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




by the risk of what Stengers and Whitehead call “wandering,” what Batesonnamed a “muddle,” and what Wedde and I suggest is the risk of play. Thisis queer theory, indeed, outside reproductive teleology and oﬀ-category—that is, oﬀ-topic, out of topos(proper place), into tropos(swerving and somaking meaning new).God is deﬁnitely not queer. The sixth day of creation in Genesis:–is when God, helpfully speaking English, said, “‘Let the earthbring forth living creatures according to their kinds.’ . . . And God madethe beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the cattle accordingto their kinds, and everything that creeps upon the ground according toits kind. And God saw that it was good.” A little overfocused on keepingkinds distinct, God then got to making man (male and female) in his ownimage and giving them all too much dominion, as well as the command tomultiply out of all bounds of sharing the earth. I think the sixth day iswhere the problem of joint mundane creaturely kinship versus humanexceptionalism is sharply posed right in the ﬁrst chapter of Jewish andChristian monotheism. Islam did no better on this point. We have pluralsof kind but singularity of relationship, namely, human dominion underGod’s dominion. Everything is food for man; man is food only for him-self and his God. In this feast, there are no companion species, no cross-category messmates at table. There is no salutary indigestion, only licensedcultivation and husbandry of all the earth as stock for human use. Theposthumanities—I think this is another word for “after monotheism”—require another kind of open. Pay attention. It’s about time.ENDING IN A CONTACT ZONE:THE DEVIL IS IN THE DETAILSAugust , Dear Agility Friends,Up until now, I would not have said Ms CayennePepper was drawn to the pause table. This morning,however, while Rusten was putting the last coat of luridyellow paint on the rough sandy surface of the new pausetable he made me for my birthday (along with a veryprofessional A-frame, broad jump, and teeter-totter),TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONEd245




Cayenne made known her great, if newfound, love forjumping onto this contact obstacle. Splat into the wet, brightpaint she leapt, blithely ignoring my strongly wordedsuggestion that, in fulﬁllment of her normal morningobligations, she leave early and speed the newspaper toCaudill’s mailbox in exchange for a tasty vitamin pill.As my teacher Gail Frazier will attest, it is not unheardof for Cayenne in training and at trials to bounce oﬀthepause table before the magic of the release cue. Not this time.She held her ground with conviction; no two-point penaltiesfor her. Belly to the paint, Cayenne was telling me that wenow have that automatic down on the table for which we hadworked so hard. Timing is all.Decorated for play at this weekend’s USDAA trials,Donna246dTRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE




III. TANGLED SPECIES




This page intentionally left blank 




9. CRITTERCAMCompounding Eyes inNatureculturesIn this interconnection of embodied being and environing world, whathappens in the interface is what is important.—Don Ihde, Bodies in TechnologyFingery eyes literally plunge the viewer into materialized perceptions.—Eva Shawn Hayward, “Envisioning Invertebrates: Immersion,Inhabitation, and Intimacy as Modes of Encounter inMarine TechnoArt”Anything can happen when an animal is your cameraman.—CrittercamadvertisementINFOLDINGS AND JUDGE’S CHAMBERSDon Ihde and I share a basic commitment. As Ihde puts it, “Inso-far as I use or employ a technology, I am used by and employedby that technology as well. . . . We are bodies in technologies.”1There-fore, technologies are not mediations, something in between us andanother bit of the world. Rather, technologies are organs, full partners,in what Merleau-Ponty called “infoldings of the ﬂesh.” I like the wordinfoldingbetter than interfaceto suggest the dance of world-makingencounters. What happens in the folds is what is important. Infoldings ofthe ﬂesh areworldly embodiment. The word makes me see the highlymagniﬁed surfaces of cells shown by scanning electron microscopes. Inthose pictures, we experience in optic–haptic touch the high mountainsand valleys, entwined organelles and visiting bacteria, and multiforminterdigitations of surfaces we can never again imagine as smoothinterfaces. Interfaces are made out of interacting grappling devices.Further, syntactically and materially, worldly embodiment isalways a verb, or at least a gerund. Always in formation, embod-iment is ongoing, dynamic, situated, and historical. No matter




what the chemical score for the dance—carbon, silicon, or somethingelse—the partners in infoldings of the ﬂesh are heterogeneous. That is,the infolding of others to one anotheris what makes up the knots we callbeings or, perhaps better, following Bruno Latour, things.2Things arematerial, speciﬁc, non-self-identical, and semiotically active. In the realmof the living, critter is another name for thing. Critters are what thischapter is about.Never purely themselves, things are compound; they are made upof combinations of other things coordinated to magnify power, to makesomething happen, to engage the world, to risk ﬂeshly acts of interpreta-tion. Technologies are always compound. They are composed of diverseagents of interpretation, agents of recording, and agents for directingand multiplying relational action. These agents can be human beings orparts of human beings, other organisms in part or whole, machines ofmany kinds, or other sorts of entrained things made to work in thetechnological compound of conjoined forces. Remember also, one of themeanings of compoundis “an enclosure, within which there is a residenceor a factory”—or, perhaps, a prison or temple. Finally, a compound ani-mal in zoological terminology refers to a composite of individual organ-isms, an enclosure of zoons, a company of critters infolded into one.Connected by Crittercam’s stolon—that is, the circulatory apparatus ofits compounded visualizing practices—zoons are technologies, and tech-nologies are zoons.So, a compound is both a composite and an enclosure. In “Critter-cam: Compounding Eyes in Naturecultures,” I am interested in query-ing both of these aspects of the early twenty-ﬁrst-century compositionmade up of nonhuman marine animals, human marine scientists, a seriesof cameras, a motley of associated equipment, the National GeographicSociety, a popular television nature show, its associated Web site, andsober publications in ocean science journals.At ﬁrst glance, strapped to the body of critters such as green tur-tles in Shark Bay, oﬀWestern Australia, humpback whales in the watersoﬀsoutheast Alaska, and emperor penguins in Antarctica, a nifty minia-ture video camera is the central protagonist. Since the ﬁrst overwroughtseventeenth-century European discussions about the camera lucida andcamera obscura, within technoculture the camera (the technological eye)250dCRITTERCAM




seems to be the central object of both philosophical pretension and self-certainty, on the one hand, and cultural skepticism and the authenticity-destroying powers of the artiﬁcial, on the other hand. The camera—thatvault or arched chamber, that judge’s chamber—moved from elite Latinto the vulgar, democratic idiom in the nineteenth century only as a con-sequence of a new technology called photography, or “light-writing.” Acamera became a black box with which to register pictures of the out-side world in a representational, mentalist, and sunny semiotic economy,an analogy to the seeing eye in brainy, knowing man, for whom bodyand mind are suspicious strangers, if also near neighbors in the head.Nonetheless, no matter how gussied up with digitalized optical powers,the camera has never lost its job to function as a judge’s chamber, incamera, within which the facts of the world—indeed, the critters of theworld—are assayed by the standard of the visually convincing and, at leastas important, the visually new and exciting.At second glance, however, Crittercam, the up-to-the minute photo -graphic judge’s chamber packed by the likes of dugongs and nurse sharks,entrains us, compounds us, within heterogeneous infoldings of the ﬂeshthat require a much more interesting dramaturgy than that possible for anyself-reporting, central protagonist, no matter how visually well endowed.This second glance will occupy most of this chapter, but ﬁrst we haveto plough through some very predictable semiotic road blocks that try tolimit us to a cartoonish epistemology about visual self-evidence and thelifeworlds of human–animal–technology compounds.FIRST SIGHTIn , the National Geographic Channel launched a series of TVshows called Crittercam.3The announcements and framing narrativesfor the show present an easy target for a chortling ideology critique witha superiority complex.4The animals who carry the attached cameras intotheir watery worlds are presented as makers of home movies that reporton the actual state of things without human interference or even humanpresence. As the American Association for the Advancement of Sci-ence online Science Update put it in , we will learn “why one marinescientist started handing out camcorders directly to the sea creaturesCRITTERCAMd251




he wanted to study. The result: Some very unique home movies.” Crit-tercam, we are told in the voice-over of the television series, “canreveal hidden lives.” The camera is a “National Geographic high-tech sci-entiﬁc video tool worn by species on the edge.” The reports come fromthat sacred–secular place of endangerment, of threatened extinction,where beings are needy of both physical and epistemological rescue.Reports from such edges have special power. “Anything can happen whenan animal is your cameraman,” declaimed a brochure for the series thatI picked up at the Hearst Castle gift shop on the California coast inFebruary .National Geographic Channel’s Web site whetted the audience’sappetite for dis- and reembodiment through identiﬁcation: “Meet ourcamera crews—they’re all animals! . . . Sit back and imagine you aretaking a ride on the back of the world’s greatest mammal, or seeing lifefrom the point of view of a penguin. The new Crittercam series takesyou as close as you can get to the animal world.” The camera is bothphysical “high technology” and immaterial channel to the interior reachesof another. Through the camera’s eye glued, literally, to the body of theother, we are promised the full sensory experience of the critters them-selves, without the curse of having to remain human: “Sense water rush-ing past, hear the thunderous roar of the wind and experience the thrillof the hunt. . . . Dive, swim, hunt, and burrow in animal habitats wherehumans can never go.” Addressing children, the February , , on-line Crittercam Chroniclesasked, “Have you ever wondered what it wouldbe like to bea wild animal? . . . You can experience their life the waythey do.” Speaking to adults, National Geographic tells us that the Crit-tercam is rapidly changing science ﬁction into reality by “eliminatinghuman presence and allowing us entry into otherwise virtually inacces-sible habitats.”Immediate experience of otherness, inhabitation of the other asa new self, sensation and truth in one package without the pollution ofinterfering or interacting: these are the lure of Crittercam,the TV show,and Crittercam, the instrument. Reading these promises, I felt as if Iwere back in some versions of consciousness-raising groups and ﬁlmprojects of the early s women’s liberation movement, in which self-reporting on unmediated experience seemed attainable, especially if women252dCRITTERCAM




had cameras and turned them on themselves. Become self by seeing selfthrough the eyes of self. The only change is that National Geographic’sCrittercampromises that self becomes other’s self. Now, that’s point of view!SECOND SIGHTThe National Geographic Web site tells a little parable about the ori-gin of the Crittercams themselves. In in the waters oﬀBelize, a bigshark approached a diving biology graduate student and ﬁlmmaker, GregMarshall, and swam away with three quick strokes of its powerful tail.Marshall looked longingly after the disappearing shark and spotted asmall sucker ﬁsh, a remora, an unobtrusive witness to sharky reality,clinging to the big predator. “Envying the remora its intimate knowledgeof shark life, Marshall conceived a mechanical equivalent: a video camera,sheltered by waterproof housing, attached to a marine animal.” Now ourorigin story is getting more interesting; we are no longer inside a cartoonideology of immediacy and stolen selves. Instead Marshall longed for,and built, the remora’s intimate view of shark life.5Some body-snatchingis still going on here, but becoming-remora is much more promising in anentangled-species world. Endowed with second sight, we can now enterthe compounded world of infoldings of the ﬂesh, because we have left thegarden of self-identity and risked the embodied longings and points ofview of surrogates, substitutes, and sidekicks. At last, we get to grow up—or, in another idiom, get real. Neither cynical nor naive, we can becomesavvy about reality engines.6We are, in Ihde’s words, bodies in technolo-gies, in fold after fold, with no unwrinkled place to stop.If we take the remora seriously as the analogue for Crittercam, thenwe have to think about just what the relationships of human beings are tothe animals swimming about with sucker cameras on their hides. Clearly,the swimming sharks and loggerhead turtles are not in a “companion ani-mal” relationship to the people, on the model of herding dogs or othercritters with whom people have worked out elaborate and more-or-lessacknowledged cohabitations.7The camera and the remora are more aboutaccompanying than companioning, more about “riding along with” ratherthan “cum panis,” that is, “eating bread with.” Remoras and Crittercams arenot messmates to either people or sharks; they are commensals, neitherCRITTERCAMd253




benefactors nor parasites but devices with their own ends who/whichhitch a ride. So, this chapter turns out to be about a commensal techno-logical lifeworld. Same housing, not the same dinner. Same compound;distinct ends. Together for a while, welded by vacuum-generating suckersor good glue. Thanks to their remora-like technological surrogates, inspite of narratives to the contrary, Crittercam’s people are decidedly notabsent from the doings of the animals they are interested in; technologi-cally active humans get to ride along, holding on as best they can.At this point, the scholar of science and technology studies startsasking about how the Crittercams are designed and built; how that designchanges for each of the forty-odd species who had their techno-remorasﬁtted by ; what things look like from the attached cameras, someof which seem to be at very odd angles; what the devices’ technical andsocial history is over time; how well they hold on; how the join is brokenand data collected and read; how audiences (scientiﬁc and popular, childand adult) learn the needed semiotic skills to watch animal home vid-eos and have any idea of what they are seeing; what kinds of data besidesthe visual the devices can collect; how those data integrate with data col-lected in other ways; how the National Geographic Crittercam projectsattach themselves to established, ongoing research projects on the animals;whether those collegial attachments are parasitic, cooperative, or com-mensal; and whose (animal and human) labor, play, and resources makeall this possible. Once one gets beyond the numbing narratives of divingwith/as the gods and feeling the divine wind in the abducted face, it turnsout that all of these questions can be addressed from the TV shows them-selves and their associated Web site.It is impossible to watch Crittercamshows and not be exhausted andexhilarated by the scenes of athletic, skillful human beings lustily infold-ing their ﬂesh and their cameras’ ﬂesh with the bodies of critter after crit-ter. The sheer physicalityof all that is Crittercam dominates the televisionscreen. How could a mentalistic “camera’s eye” narrative ever take holdin the face of such immersion in boats, sea spray, waves, immense whalesand slippery dugongs, speed and diving, piloting challenges, team inter-actions, and the materialities of engineering and using the plethora ofcameras and other data-collecting devices that are Crittercam? Indeed,the visual structuring of the TV episodes emphasizes bodies, things, parts,254dCRITTERCAM




substances, sensory experience, timing, emotions—everything that is thethick stuﬀof Crittercam’s lifeworld. The cuts are fast; the visual ﬁelds,littered; the size scales of things and critters in relation to the humanbody, rapidly switched so that the viewer never feels comfortable with theillusion that anything much can be physically taken for granted in relationto oneself. Part bodies of organisms and technologies predominate overwhole-body shots. But never is Crittercam’s audience allowed to imaginevisuallyor hapticallythe absence of physicality and crowded presences, nomatter what the voice-over says. The word may not be made ﬂesh here,but everything else is.Consider ﬁrst the boats, the people in them, and the animals pur-sued by them. The TV show audience learns quickly that each Crittercamproject requires fast boats; expert pilots; and agile, jocular, well-muscledscientist–divers ready to jump oﬀa moving boat and embrace a largeswimming critter who is presumably not especially longing to hug ahuman. In the episode about green turtles and loggerhead turtles oﬀWestern Australia, the host Mike Heithaus tells the audience that “chas-ing after turtles is kind of like being a stunt driver.” Of course, ﬁrst thecrews have to ﬁnd the animals to whom they want to attach their sort ofcommensal remora. Looking for leatherback turtles oﬀCosta Rica, Crit-tercam people worked with former poachers–turned–tour guides to ﬁndthese biggest—and, naturally, acutely endangered—marine reptiles onearth, who make a living eating jellyﬁsh. Crittercam scientists and enter-tainment producers also have to consider that some critters can’t wear thecurrent generation of videocams safely; too much drag could lead to theanimal’s early demise. Thus, we learn, imperial turtles will have to wait formore miniaturization for their remora-like accompaniments.In the waters of Shark Bay, where the National Geographic RemoteImaging Team and television crew were looking for dugongs, local Aborig -inals worked on the boats as sea trackers.8Implicit in that labor practiceare the complex metamorphoses of these particular Aboriginal peoplefrom hunters of dugongs to their conservationists and comanagers ofresearch permits and ecotourism. Plant-eating mammals that spend allof their lives in the sea, dugongs are marine relatives of elephants, whoshared their last common ancestor about twenty-ﬁve million years ago.TV show host Heithaus, himself a PhD scientist who studies predator–CRITTERCAMd255




prey interactions among marine animals, with a special taste for sharks,never fails to remind the viewer of the conservation message in all Crit-tercam projects. Such messages include reassurances that special permitswere obtained to harass endangered animals with research boats, thatinterference was kept to a minimum and never pursued to the point ofexhausting the animals, and that all of the operations are part of savingorganisms and habitats on the edge of extinction.That has always been the argument of natural history extravaganzas,whether colonial or postcolonial. It might even be true. It takes believingthat, under current conditions, knowledge saves; or at least, if not a suﬃ-cient condition for enduring and ﬂourishing, ﬁnite secular knowledgecalled science is deﬁnitely a necessary condition. Sign me on to that reli-gion. Still, I do long for an idiom that considers multispecies ﬂourish-ing outside the idiom and apparatus of“Saving the Endangered [ﬁll in theblank].” Rooted in a commitment to the mortal mundane, rather than toeither Sacred or Secular Salvation, my longing has to do with the hetero-geneous actors necessary to Isabelle Stengers’s cosmopolitics.Not all Crittercams are attached with a hug. Besides consideringwhether a barnacle-crusted hide will accept sucker cups, be better oﬀwithepoxy glue, or need some other attachment technique, Crittercam peoplehave to solve, physically,how to get the videocam packages onto beings asdiﬀerent from one another as dugongs, humpback whales, nurse sharks,and emperor penguins. Take the humpback whales oﬀsoutheast Alaska.Computer simulations helped remote imaging engineers design specialsuction cups for these critters. We hear on TV that “technology, team-work, and a federal permit were required to get this close to the whales.”Many weeks of unsuccessful attempts to attach a camera to a whale (almosta whole research season) were reduced to a couple of minutes of TV timeshowing one failed attempt after another to plant a camera hanging oﬀalong pole onto a giant moving whale from a boat. Sixteen Crittercams (eachworth about ten thousand dollars) were ﬁnally successfully deployed. Re -trieving those cameras after they came oﬀthe whales is an epic tale initself; witness the ninety miles traveled and the seven hours in a helicop-ter, following elusive VHF signals, that lead engineer Mehdi Bakhtiarilogged to get one camera back from the sea. Thankfully, the remoras onthe whales got an eyeful, but more of that later.256dCRITTERCAM




Crittercam units are assembled on the TV screen. Attachment de -vices (sucker, ﬁn clamp, or adhesive mount), integrated video camcorderand data-logging system, microphone, pressure and temperature gauges,headlights, the tracking system for cameras (both those that are stillattached and those that have been released from the animals), and theremote release button are all given screen time. However, the technologyis put together so quickly in a burst of fast visual cuts from component tocomponent that the viewer is dazed more than informed. Still, it wouldbe impossible to get the visual impression that the camera is a mentalis-tic, dematerializing black box.In a more relaxed mood, the interested viewer has easy Internetaccess to technical descriptions and time lines for the Crittercam pack-ages. We learn that in the cameras record on Hi-or digital videotape; that housings are modiﬁed for diﬀerent conditions, with titanium-encased units equipped with visual intensiﬁcation capability that canrecord at two thousand meters or more; that ﬁeld reprogrammability ofkey elements is facilitated by onsite personal computers; that other sortsof data are logged by sensors for salinity, depth, speed, light level, audio,and more; and that data and imaging sampling can be segregated fordiﬀerent time-scheduling demands corresponding to the research ques-tions being asked. We learn about time-sampling schedules and capacitiesof the data-collecting devices. Three hours of color recording by ispretty impressive, especially when those hours can be parsed to acquire,say, twenty seconds every three minutes.On the Internet, we learn about the progressive miniaturizationand greater powers of Crittercams from the ﬁrst model in , whenouter diameters were inches or more, to outer diameters of .incheswith increased data-collecting capabilities in . Sneaked into the Website narrative is the information that most of Crittercam’s complex bodyis proprietary but was initially built on the basis of existing systems fromSony and JVC. Property matters; by deﬁnition, it is about access; Critter -cam is about access. We are told about Greg Marshall’s early unsuccessfulhunt for both funding and scientiﬁc credibility and his eventual suc-cess with the backing of the National Geographic Society. That took thesavvy instincts of a National Geographic television producer, John Bredar.Development grants followed, with the ﬁrst successful deployments onCRITTERCAMd257




free-swimming sharks and sea turtles in . Now Greg Marshall headsup National Geographic’s Remote Imaging Program, which is engagedin worldwide scientiﬁc collaborations. Finally, we aren’t allowed to forgetthe dreams for the future: Someday Crittercam packages will tell us aboutphysiological parameters such as EKG and stomach temperature. Then,there is the two-inch camera in the near-term imagination of the engi-neers. These are home movies with a future twist.The TV screen itself in Crittercamepisodes deserves close atten-tion. Especially in scenes featuring Crittercam footage, the viewer is in -vited to adopt the persona of a videogame player by the semiotic designof the screen. Blocking any naturalistic illusions, the screen is literally out-lined like a game space, and the shots from the heads of the critters giveforward-pointing motion like that of a videogame avatar. We get the pointof view that searchers, eaters, and predators might have of their habitat.But perhaps most striking of all is the small amount of actual Crit-tercam footage amid all the other underwater photography of the animalsand their environments that ﬁlls the episodes. Actual Crittercam footageis, in fact, usually pretty boring and hard to interpret, somewhat like anultrasound recording of a fetus. Footage without narration is more likean acid trip than a peephole to reality. Cameras might be askew on thehead of the critter or pointed down, so that we see lots of muck and lotsof water, along with bits of other organisms that make precious littlesense without a lot of other visual and narrative work. Or the videocamsmight be positioned just ﬁne, but nothing much happens during most ofthe sampling time. Viewer excitement over Crittercam imagery is a highlyproduced eﬀect. Home movies might be the right analogy after all.The most visually interesting—and by far the largest amount of—underwater photography in the episodes is given no technical discussionon the TV programs at all. We learn nothing about who took this plen-tiful non-Crittercam footage, what their cameras were like, or how theanimals and camera people interacted. Reading the credits doesn’t helpmuch. On the other hand, these genres of footage are familiar to any-one who watches much marine natural-history ﬁlm and TV. Familiarityin no way diminishes potency. Focused by Eva Shawn Hayward’s lensin her analysis of the ﬁlm The Love Life of the Octopus(Les amoursde la pieuvre), by Jean Painlevé and Genevieve Hamon, I experience in258dCRITTERCAM




Crittercam’s “conventional” footage some of the same pleasures of intima-cies at surfaces, fast changes in scale, ranges of magniﬁcation, and the im -mersive optics of refraction across varying media.9Painlevé and Hamon’sﬁlms are aesthetically much more self-conscious and skilled than Critter-cam’s assemblages, but once one learns how the dance of magniﬁcationsand scales shapes the join of touch and vision to produce Hayward’s“ﬁngery eyes,” enabled by the biological art-ﬁlm work, one seeks—andﬁnds—that kind of vision much more widely. In addition, the haptic–visual symphony of Crittercamis helped immeasurably by the intensewatery physicality of the whole package. For that, I will watch a lot ofodd-angle shots of sea bottoms taken from the hides of critters equippedwith techno-remoras.Crittercamepisodes promise something else too: scientiﬁc knowl-edge. What is learned about the animals’ lives matters a great deal.Without this dimension, the whole ediﬁce would come tumbling down.Visual–haptic pleasures in part objects and voyeuristic revels in the ath-letic maneuvers of vigorous young people and other critters in surgingwaters would not hold me or, I suspect, much of anyone else. In thismatter, I am no cynic, even if my eye is ﬁrmly on the culturally locatedtechnosocial apparatus of knowledge production. Folks in technocultureneed their juicy epistemophilic endorphin surge as much as they needsorts of sensory engagement. The brain is, after all, a chemically avid sen-sory organ.All the episodes of Crittercamemphasize that the remote imagingpeople from National Geographic hooked up with marine zoologistsdoing long-term research. In each case, the Crittercamfolks thought theirapparatus could help resolve an interesting and ecologically consequentialquestion that was not easily addressable, if at all, by other technologicalmeans. The long-term projects provided nearly all the information abouthabitats, animals, research questions, and grounds for worries about habi- tat degradation and depleted populations. For example, before Crittercamcame on the scene, more than sea turtles caught and tagged over ﬁveyears had yielded information crucial to understanding the shark–turtle,predator–prey ecologies of Shark Bay oﬀWestern Australia. But the Crit-tercampeople oﬀered a means to go with the animals into places humansotherwise could not go to see things that changed what we know andCRITTERCAMd259




how we must act as a consequence,if we have learned to care about thewell-being of the entangled animals and people in those ecologies.Probably because I work and play with herding dogs in real life,the humpback whale collaboration is my favorite one to illustrate thesepoints. Fifteen years of research about how humpbacks live and hunt inthe waters oﬀsouthwest Alaska preceded the arrival of the Crittercam.10The scientists knew each whale individually by his or her calls and tail-ﬂuke markings. The biologists developed strong ideas about the whales’collaborative hunting after watching them collect giant mouthfuls of her-ring. But researchers could not prove that collaborative hunting was in-deed what the whales were doing, with each whale taking its place in achoreographed division of labor, like that of pairs of expert border colliesgathering the sheep on the Lancashire countryside. Whale scientists sus-pected that individually known humpbacks had been knowledgeablyworking together for decades to harvest their ﬁshery, but the limits ofhumans diving with the giant cetaceans stopped them from obtainingcrucial visual evidence. Being crushed is no way to secure good data. TheCrittercam gave questing humans a way to accompany the whales as ifthe people were merely commensal sucker ﬁshes along for the ride—andthe photo op. In the idiom of Bruno Latour’s science and technologystudies, the scientists and the natural history entertainment jocks “dele-gated” parts of their work to the Crittercam multitasking package and tothe animals who bore the devices into their worlds.11We have already seen how hard it was to secure the cameras to thewhale hides and then recover them afterward. The sixteen successfullydeployed Crittercams from near the end of the season were precious. Thescientists wanted to test their hypothesis that certain whales deliberatelyblew bubbles from below to surround and trap herring that had beenherded into tight congregations by other whales, forming a kind of netaround the prey. Then, in unison the whales surged upward with theirmouths gaping to collect their teaming dinner. People could see the bub-bles from the surface, but they could not see how or where or by whomthey were produced. Humans could not really tell if the whales weredividing their labor and hunting socially.Footage from the ﬁrst ﬁfteen Crittercams did not show what thebiologists needed. Suspense on television mounted, and, I like to think,260dCRITTERCAM




suspense and worry were also rife in the non-TV labs, where people weretrying to make sense of the often confusing, vertigo-inducing picturesthe videocams brought back. Then, with the sixteenth videotape, shotby a Crittercam-bearing member of the pod, came a clear view, just afew seconds long, of a whale going below the gathered herring that weresurrounded by other whales and blowing a bubble net. Callers, bubbleblowers, and herders were all accounted for. Bits of footage put togetherfrom several cameras gave a reconstructed, visually supported narrative ofthe border collie–like whales gathering their ﬁsh-sheep, penning themﬂawlessly, and eating them enthusiastically. Good border collies don’t dothat part, but their cousins and ancestors, the socially hunting wolves, do.A knowledge bonus also came from the Crittercam in the hump-back whale social hunting story. Bits of whale skin adhered to the de -tached suction cups once the videocam packages were released, and soDNA analyses could be done of individually known (and named) whaleswho had taken attributable pictures of one another and their habitat. Theresult: the discovery that whales in the social hunting groups were notclose kin. The close teamwork over years would have to be explained, eco-logically and evolutionarily, in some other way. I know I should suppressmy pleasure in this result, but I raise my California wine glass to theextrafamilial social worlds of working whale colleagues. My endorphinsare at high tide.THIRD SIGHTSo, the compound eyes of the colonial organism called Crittercam are fullof articulated lenses from many kinds of coordinated, agential zoons—that is, the machinic, human, and animal beings whose historically situ-ated infoldings are the ﬂesh of contemporary naturecultures. Fugal accom-paniment is the theme, not humans abstemiously staying away to letthe animals tell an unmediated truth by making pictures of themselves.That much seems clear. But something is missing from my story so far,something we need to be at home in the hermeneutic web that is Critter-cam. The question I have been deferring is simple to ask and the devil toanswer: What is the semiotic agency of the animals in the hermeneuticlabor of Crittercam?CRITTERCAMd261




Are they just objects for the data-gathering subjects called peopleand (by delegation) machines, just “resistance” or “raw material” to thepotency and action of intentional others? Well, it shouldn’t take recount-ing twenty-ﬁve years of feminist theory and science studies to determinethe answer there: no. Okay, but are the animals then completely sym-metrical actors whose agency and intentionality are just cosmeticallymorphed variants of the unmarked kind called human? The same twenty-ﬁve years of feminist theory and science studies shout the same reply: no.It’s easy to pile on the negatives. In the Crittercam assemblage, thehermeneutic agency of the animals is not voluntary, not that of the ﬁrst-person cameraman, not intentional, not like that of coworking or com-panion animals (my border collie analogy notwithstanding), not a weakerversion of the always strong human hermeneutic game. It’s harder to spec-ify the positive content of the animals’ hermeneutic labor in Crittercam’sparticular naturalcultural encounter.But it is not impossible to get started. First, there is no way even tothink about the issue outside the relentlessly ﬂeshly entanglements of thisparticular techno-organic world. There is no general answer to the ques-tion of animals’ agential engagement in meanings, any more than thereis a general account of human meaning making. Don Ihde insisted thatin the human–technology hermeneutic relation, the technology adapts tothe humans and vice versa. Human bodies and technologies cohabit eachother in relation to particular projects or lifeworlds. “In so far as I use atechnology, I am also used by a technology.”12Surely the same insight applies to the animal–human–technologyhermeneutic relation. Hermeneutic potency is a relational matter; it’s notabout who “has” hermeneutic agency, as if it were a nominal substanceinstead of a verbal infolding. Insofar as I (and my machines) use an ani-mal, I am used by an animal (with its attached machine). I must adaptto the speciﬁc animals even as I work for years to learn to induce themto adapt to me and my artifacts in particular kinds of knowledge proj-ects. Speciﬁc sorts of animals in speciﬁc ecologies and histories make meadapt to them even as their life doings become the meaning-makinggenerator of my work. If those animals are wearing something of mymaking, our mutual but unidentical coadaptation will be diﬀerent. Theanimals, humans, and machines are all enmeshed in hermeneutic labor262dCRITTERCAM




(and play) by the material–semiotic requirements of getting on togetherin speciﬁc lifeworlds. They touch; therefore they are. It’s about the actionin contact zones.That’s the kind of insight that makes us know that situated humanbeings have epistemological–ethical obligations to the animals. Speciﬁcally,we have to learn who they are in all their nonunitary otherness in orderto have a conversation on the basis of carefully constructed, multisensory,compounded languages. The animals make demands on the humans andtheir technologies to precisely the same degree that the humans makedemands on the animals. Otherwise, the cameras fall oﬀand other badthings happen to waste everybody’s time and resources. That part is “sym-metrical,” but the contents of the demands are not symmetrical at all.That asymmetry matters a great deal. Nothing is passive to the actionof another, but all the infoldings can occur only in the ﬂeshly detail ofsituated, material–semiotic beings. The privilege of people accompany-ing animals depends on getting these asymmetrical relationships right.13Compound eyes use diﬀerent refractive indices, diﬀerent materials, diﬀer-ent ﬂuids, to get something in focus. There is no better place to learn suchthings than in the immersive depths of the earth’s oceans.CRITTERCAMd263




This page intentionally left blank 




10. CHICKENrooster: Ego dixi: Coccadoodul du.chickens: Gallus magniﬁce incendens exclamat. Nunc venitagricola.—Grunt,Pigorian Chant from Snouto Domoinko de SiloChicken is no coward. Indeed, this warrior bird has plied histrade as a ﬁghting cock around the world since the earliest dayssuch fowl consented to work for people, somewhere in South andSoutheast Asia.1Anxious if brave, Chicken Little has long worried that the sky isfalling. He has a good vantage point from which to assess this matter;for Chicken, right along with his overreaching companion, Homo sapi-ens,has been witness to and participant in all the big events of Civiliza-tion. Chicken labored on the Egyptian pyramids, when barley-pinchingpharaohs started the world’s ﬁrst mass egg industry to feed the avians’co-conscripted human workers. Much later—a bit after the Egyptiansreplaced their barley exchange system with proper coins, thus acting likethe progressive capitalists their exchange partners always seem to wantin that part of the world—Julius Caesar brought the Pax Romana,along with the “ancient English” chicken breed, the Dorking, toBritain. Chicken Little knows all about the shock and awe of His-tory, and he is a master at tracking the routes of Globalizations,old and new. Technoscience is no stranger either. Add to that,




Chicken knows a lot about Biodiversity and Cultural Diversity, whetherone thinks about the startling variety of chickenkind for the ﬁve thousandyears of their domestic arrangements with humanity or considers the “im -proved breeds” accompanying capitalist class formations from the nine-teenth century to now. No county fair is complete without its gorgeous“purebred” chickens, who know a lot about the history of eugenics. It ishard to sort out shock from awe in chickenland. Whether the ﬁrmamenttakes a calamitous tumble or not, Chicken holds up a good half of the sky.In c.e., Chicken Little donned his spurs once more and enteredthe war on words thrust on him by Current Events.2Ever a gender ben-der, Chicken joined the LGBT Brigade and outdid himself as a post-colonial, transnational, pissed-oﬀspent hen and mad feminist.3Chickenadmitted that s/he was inspired by the all (human) girl undergroundﬁght clubs that s/he found out about on www.extremechickﬁghts.com.Ignoring the sexism of chick,extreme or not, and the porn industry andpedophilic scene that viliﬁes the name of chicken, our Bird raptured thoseﬁghting girls right out of History and into his trannie sf world, ﬁt toconfront the Eagles of War and the Captains of Industry. S/he felt thisrapturous power because s/he recalled not just the exploits of CousinPhoenix but also the years when s/he too was a ﬁgure of Jesus Resur-rected, promising the faithful that they would rise from the ashes of His-tory’s barbecues.Barbecue. An unkind reminder of where Chicken Little had bestconcentrate her attention. For, at the end of a millennium, in , tenbillion chickens were slaughtered in the United States alone. Worldwide,ﬁve billion hens—percent in cramped, multioccupancy quarters calledbattery cages—were laying eggs, with Chinese ﬂocks leading the way,followed by those in the United States and Europe.4Thai chicken exportstopped $.billion in value in an industry supplying Japanese and E.U.markets and employing hundreds of thousands of Thai citizens. Worldchicken production was .million tons, and the whole operation wasgrowing at percent per year. Captains of Industry, indeed. Chicken couldconclude that a major avian vocation seems to be breakfast and dinnerwhile the world burns.5Contrary to the views of her pesky friends in the transnational ani-mal rights movement, our Opportunistic Bird is not against surrendering266dCHICKEN




a pound of ﬂesh in exchange for pecking rights in the naturalculturalcontractual arrangements that domesticated both bipedal hominids andwinged gallinaceous avians. But something is seriously foul in current ver-sions of multispecies global contract theory.6One way to tell the trouble (one detail among myriads) is that athree-year study in Tulsa, Oklahoma—a center of factory chicken pro-duction—showed that half the water supply was dangerously polluted bypoultry waste. Go ahead, microwave sponges in your kitchens as often asthe clean food cops advise; inventive bacteria will outwit you with theirfowl alliances.Well, one more detail. Manipulated genetically since the s torapidly grow megabreasts, chickens given a choice choose food laced withpainkillers. “Unsustainable growth rates” are supposed to be about dot-com fantasies and inﬂationary stock markets. In Chicken’s world, how-ever, that term designates the daily immolation of forced maturation anddisproportionate tissue development that produces tasty (enough) youngbirds who are often enough unable to walk, ﬂap their wings, or even standup. Muscles linked in evolutionary history and religious symbolism toﬂight, sexual display, and transcendence instead pump iron for transna-tional growth industries. Not satisﬁed, some agribusiness scientists lookto post genomics research for even more buﬀed white meat.7Since chickens were the ﬁrst farm animals to be permanentlyconﬁned indoors and made to labor in automated systems based on Tech -noscience’s ﬁnest genetic technologies, research on feed-conversion eﬃ-ciency,and miracle drugs (not painkillers but antibiotics and hormones),8Chicken might be excused for being unimpressed by the McDonald Cor-poration’s grudging agreement in to require that its suppliers givepercent more space per bird destined to be Chicken McNuggets andEggs McMuﬃn. Still, McDonald’s was the ﬁrst corporation in the worldto admit that pain and suﬀering are concepts familiar to underrated birdbrains. Chicken’s ingratitude is no wonder, when few “humane” slaughterlaws in the United States or Canada to this day apply to chickens.9In the European Union did manage to ban battery cages,be ginning in . That should allow for a smooth transition. Perhapsmore sensitized to ever-ready Holocaust analogies, the Germans willmake those cages illegal in . In the market-besotted United States,CHICKENd267




Chicken’s hope seems to be in designer eggs for the omega-fatty acid–conscious and free-range certiﬁed organic chickens for the conscience-stricken and pure of diet.10The up-to-the-minute ethically fastidiousmight procure their chicken ﬁx like the citizens in Oryx and Crake,Margaret Atwood’s sf, especially in the sense of speculative ﬁction, novel(published in ). There, “ChickenNobs”—tasty organs without organ- isms, especially without annoying heads that register pain and perhapshave ideas about what constitutes a proper domestic bird’s life—are onthe menu. Genetically engineered muscles-without-animals illustrate ex -actly what Sarah Franklin means by designer ethics, which aim to by passcultural struggle with just-in-time, “high technology” breakthroughs.11Design away the controversy, and all those free-range anarchists will haveto go home. But remember, Chicken squawks even when his head hasbeen cut oﬀ.The law cannot be counted on. After all, even human laborers in thechicken industry are superexploited. Thinking of battery cages for lay-ing hens reminds Chicken Little of how many illegal immigrants, un-unionized women and men, people of color, and former prisoners processchickens in Georgia, Arkansas, and Ohio. It’s no wonder that at least oneU.S. soldier who tortured Iraqi prisoners was a chicken processor in hercivilian life.It’s enough to make a sensitive Bird sick, as much from the virusof transnational politics as from the other kind. An avian ﬂu outbreakin seven Asian nations shocked the world in the winter of and fearof a global pandemic remains lively in . Luckily, by mid-onlyabout humans had died, unlike the tens of millions who succumbedin –. Mass culling remains the oﬃcially recommended response toevery appearance of the disease in domestic ﬂocks, and sporadic threatsto kill migrating birds are not empty.12Chicken Little could not ﬁndﬁgures for total estimated bird deaths worldwide, from the disease andfrom culling. But before the end of , about twenty million chickenswere prophylactically slaughtered in Thailand alone. Global TV newsshowed unprotected human workers stuﬃng innumerable birds intosacks, tossing them undead into mass graves, and sprinkling on lime. InThailand, percent of chicken operations are, in Global Speak, “small”(fewer than one thousand birds, since it takes more than eighty thousand268dCHICKEN




to be “large”) and could not aﬀord biosecurity—for people or birds.Newscasters waxed eloquent about a threatened transnational industrybut spoke nary a word about farmers’ and chickens’ lives. Meanwhile,Indonesian government spokespeople in denied any avian ﬂu inthose salubrious quarters, even while Indonesian veterinary associationsargued that millions of birds showed signs of avian ﬂu as early as Octo-ber of that year. And then came Indonesia’s unpleasant number-oneworld rank for human deaths in .Perhaps the Bangkok Poston January , , got the war ofworlds, words, and images right with a cartoon showing migratory birdsfrom the north dropping bombs—bird shit full of avian ﬂu strainHN—on the geobody of the Thai nation.13This postcolonial joke ontransborder bioterrorism is a nice reversal of U.S. and European fears ofimmigrants of all species from the global south. After all, prototypes forCHICKENd269

Peace Chicken.Copyright Dan Piraro. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved.




technoscientiﬁc, export-oriented, epidemic friendly chicken industrieswere big on the Peace Corps agenda (a theme picked up later by the Gen-eral Agreement on Tariﬀs and Trade), right along with artiﬁcial milk forinfants. Proud progenitor of such meaty progress, the United States hadhigh hopes for winning the Cold War in Asia with standardized broilersand layers carrying democratic values. In Eugene Burdick and William J.Lederer’s novel, The Ugly American,set in a ﬁctional SoutheastAsian nation called Sarkan, Iowa chicken farmer and agricultural teacherTom Knox was about the only decent U.S. guy. Neither Knox nor sub-sequent Development Experts seem to have cared much for the variedchicken–human livelihoods thriving for a few thousand years throughoutAsia. In , it seemed, the TV news showed unstandardized chickensliving in close contact with ordinary people only to illustrate backward-ness and public health failures, except for occasionally advertising tastyfree-range birds living in the European Union and North America anddestined for transnational aﬄuent niche markets. Even those birds haveto go indoors when HNcomes calling.Sub-Saharan Africa entered the story in the most abject way, seem-ingly naturally once again; postcolonial tropes, not to mention postcolo-nial injustice, demand it.14In February , the HNstrain of birdﬂu was conﬁrmed on three farms in northern Nigeria, initiating large-scale culls. Making public health control measures especially diﬃcult,customary poultry husbandry, in which people and birds associate closely,exists cheek by jowl with a ﬂedgling agribusiness chicken industry thatwould make Iowa’s Tom Knox proud. By August , human cases ofbird ﬂu were conﬁrmed, tens of thousands of birds had died, poultry mar-kets were closing down, and the World Health Organization had approvedﬁfty million dollars to try to stem the trouble.Two suspects, both signifying transborder crossings outside the reachof the law, emerged for spreading the virus to Nigeria—migrating birdsand illegally imported baby chicks. Closer scrutiny of the geographicalpattern of aﬀected farms indicated that migrating birds were insigniﬁcantcompared with that staple of global neoliberalism: illegal trade involv-ing the world’s poorest populations tied to the most economically entre-preneurial conﬁgurations.15Without reliable climate-controlled hatcheryfacilities, Nigerians sought to cash in on the lucrative global poultry trade270dCHICKEN




through obtaining extralegal chicks from China. Smuggling of all sortsbetween Africa and China is not news; comprehending that a global pan-demic coupled to ordinary African farmers’ further immiseration mightbe one of its fruits did open a few eyes.16But never enough eyes.How many good citizens of the above-ground world would be sur-prised by the news that an illegal trade in chicken parts makes more moneythan even weapons traﬃcking in another abjected, war-riddled geopoliti-cal zone, namely, the borderlands joining Moldavia, Trans-Dniestria, andUkraine in the former Soviet Union? Spicing this particular story is thename locals give to the traﬃcked chicken hind quarters: “Bush legs,” amoniker tracing to George senior’s program to ship U.S. poultry to theSoviet Union in the early s.17Worldwide, the illegal animal trade ofall sorts is second in total value only to illegal drugs.Chicken is, of course, no virgin to debates about political orders.Our fowl was the darling of savants’ disputes about the nature of mindand instincts, and the “philosopher’s chick” was a staple of Europeannineteenth-century learned idioms. Translated into the only proper globallanguage, famous experiments in comparative psychology gave the worldthe term pecking orderin the s. Chicken Little remembers that thisresearch by the Norwegian Thorleif Schjelderup-Ebbe, a serious loverand student of chickens, described complex social arrangements worthyof fowl, not the wooden dominance hierarchies in biopolitics that gainedsuch a hold on cultural imaginations.18Behavioral sciences of both humanand nonhuman varieties continue to ﬁnd anything but dominance andsubordination hard to think about. Chicken knows that producing bet-ter accounts of animal doings, with one another and with humans, canplay an important role in reclaiming livable politics. But ﬁrst came thehard years for chickens, whose subjection to the scientiﬁc, commercial,and political dreams of aspiring communities, entrepreneurs, and nationbuilders alike is not yet over.In the s, seeking to escape urban poverty, several hundredJewish families—idealists, secularists, socialists, Jews from the shtetls ofEastern Europe and the sweatshops of New York’s Lower East Side—gotthe word that they could make a living in the “Chicken Basket of theWorld,” the little town of Petaluma in California.19Economic crises andunbridgeable debates about Israel or the Soviet Union all but tore theCHICKENd271




once-thriving community apart after World War II, but not beforeChicken had brought the Petaluma Jewish Folk Chorus together withPaul Robeson in concert. Chicken fared less well; Petaluma was a majorcenter of the industrialization of animal life, and neither socialism norcommunism of that period had any strategies to oﬀer laboring bodieswho were not human. Perhaps partly because of that gap in the visionsof those who most knew how to work toward communitarian freedom,the hyperexploited laboring bodies of both chickens and humans arejoined in a terrifying global industry by the early twenty-ﬁrst century.The hopeful and tragic politics of Jewish chicken farmers turns upone more time in Chicken Little’s research, this time joined to the fowl’sreading pursuits in science ﬁction. From the ﬁrst decades of the twentiethcentury, Rutgers, the state university of New Jersey, like other U.S. land-grant colleges, was a leader in poultry science linked to the industrializa-tion of the chicken in American and world agriculture. After World WarII, multitudes of veterans looked to poultry farming as a way to pros-perity. Among the avid students studying at Rutgers’s Poultry ScienceDepartment in the late s was a young woman with a job in wartimearmy photo intelligence behind her (and ahead of her, a role in the devel-opment of the CIA from to as well as a PhD in experimentalpsychology earned in ). This chicken science student would becomeknown to the sf world in the late s as a reclusive male writer namedJames Tiptree Jr. But in the s she was Alice Sheldon, who, with herhusband Col. Huntington Sheldon, ran a small chicken farm in New Jer-sey from to . Tiptree’s biographer records Alice and Hunting-ton’s love of the Rutgers scene, all of it, including the science, the business,and the comradeship. “Most of their fellow students were veterans likethem, though several were on their way to Palestine to lend their farmingskills to the proposed new state of Israel.”20Whether publishing as James Tiptree Jr., Alice Sheldon, or RacoonaSheldon, this category bender worthy of Chicken Little wrote scienceﬁction that toyed mercilessly with species, alternation of generations, re-production, infection, gender, genre, and many kinds of genocide. Didthose chickens inspire some of her quirky sf imagination and unsettlingfeminist thought experiments? Tiptree “once told [fellow sf writer] VondaMcIntyre she was sketching out a plot about ‘a chicken hatchery set in272dCHICKEN




the asteroids, run by women in competition with a huge processed-foodscorporation.’”21Were Tiptree’s chickens ever free-ranging fowl peckingat insects, or were they hatched in incubators for the developing post-war animal–industrial complex? Did Racoona Sheldon resonate withthat great est threat to outdoor chickens in the United States, the wilyraccoon? Did the luxuriating brutalities of industrial chicken produc-tion that took oﬀin the s fuel any of Tiptree’s many dark alien bio-logical stories?22Laying hens and fertile eggs dominate Chicken Little’s closingthoughts. Perversely, s/he ﬁnds there the stuﬀof still possible freedomprojects and renewed awe. The British claymation ﬁlm Chicken Run()stars s Yorkshire hens facing a life of forced toil. The appearanceof Rocky, the Rhode Island red, catalyzes a liberation drama that givesno comfort either to “deep animal rights” imaginations of a time beforecospecies domestication or to millennial nation builders and free tradersin chicken ﬂesh. Pecking hens have other biopolitical tricks tucked undertheir wings.Perhaps the Rare Breeds Survival Trust (RBST) and its sibling orga-nizations around the world are incubating what socialists, communists,Zionists, Asian industrial tigers, nationalists in the Caucasus, transna-tional poultry scientists, and Iowa Democrats failed to imagine: ongoingchicken–human lives that are attentive to complex histories of animal–human entanglements, fully contemporary andcommitted to a futureof multispecies naturalcultural ﬂourishing in both wild and domesticdomains.23RBST works against the premises and practices of factoryfarming on many levels, none of them reducible to keeping animals asmuseum specimens of a lost past or as wards in a permanent guardian-ship, in which utilitarian relations between animals and people, includingeating meat, are always deﬁned as abuse. RBST maintains a database ofbreeds of poultry threatened with disappearance through industrial stan-dardization; plans in advance how to protect rare-breed ﬂocks from exter-mination by culling in bird ﬂu and other epidemic disasters; supportshusbandry conducive to whole-organism well-being of both animals andpeople; analyzes breeds for their most economical and productive uses,including new ones; and demands eﬀective action for animal well-beingin transport, slaughter, and marketing. None of this is innocent, nor isCHICKENd273




the success of such approaches guaranteed. That is what “becoming with”as a worldly practice means.Chicken Little returns in the end to the egg—fertile eggs in schoolbiology labs that once gave millions of young hominids the privilege to seethe shocking beauty of the developing chick embryo, with its dynamicarchitectural intricacies.24These cracked-open eggs did not oﬀer an inno-cent beauty, but neither did they give warrant to colonial or postcolonialarrogances about Development. The contact zone of the chick embryocan renew the meaning of awe in a world in which laying hens know moreabout the alliances it will take to survive and ﬂourish in multispecies,multicultural, multiordered associations than do all the secondary Bushesin Florida and Washington. Follow the chicken and ﬁnd the world.The sky has not fallen, not yet.274dCHICKEN




11. BECOMING COMPANIONSPECIES IN TECHNOCULTUREBECOMING FERAL: CATS INTWENTY-FIRST-CENTURY RURAL SONOMA COUNTYOctober , , e-mail to fellow dog agility enthusiastsHi there, friends,Rusten and I have been in a catless relation to theworld since the death ﬁve years ago of twenty-one-year-old,former-feral-cat-turned-couch-mistress, Moses, but no more.A bone-thin, feral, gray tabby female had a litter of fournear the barn this spring and then, sadly, got run over by acar on Mill Creek Road. We had been supplementing herfood for a while by then, and we adopted her ﬁve-week-old kittens for the proud job of barn cats. Our carsparked by the old barn regularly became home toenterprising mice, who seemed to be buildingthriving murine communities in the warm engine




compartments. Plastic wrapping on the cars’ electrical wiresmust have provided needed trace nutrients; in any case, therodents had a relish for munching colorful synthetics. Wehoped for a little predator control assistance from felines.All four kittens are ﬂourishing and still very much feral.One of the little black guys (now known to be a male andbearing the name of all-black-clad Spike from Buﬀy theVampire Slayer) will let me pick him up and stroke him, butthe others are satisﬁed with service from humans in the formof food and water. They otherwise much prefer the companyof each other and a barn full of rodents. Spike, the tameone—also the runt of the litter—might ﬁnd himself atraveling house cat in Santa Cruz come winter quarter, if hewill agree to the transition. And if I can get Cayenne to agreeto share her couch with a feline. . . . Right now she alternatesbetween terror of cats (instilled by her godhuman’s cat,Sugar) and considering them lunch.When they were about six months old, we trapped thekittens, one at a time, with the help of Forgotten Felines inSonoma County, and got them sterilized and vaccinated forrabies and distemper. The agreement with Forgotten Felinesif they help with trap and release is that the humans promiseto feed the feral cats for the duration of their lives—expectedto be about eight to nine years, compared with one to twoyears for a feral cat not fed regularly by humans and ﬁfteento twenty years for a well-cared-for pet who comes indoorsregularly at night. Word from the cooperating vet and thefarm feed store that rents the traps is that there are probablythousands of supplemented, sterilized feral cats in SonomaCounty. Insisting on our using the traps, the vet would notlet us bring the cats to him in a regular cat crate because of ahistory of serious scratch and bite wounds from feral cats ingetting them ready for surgery.Our hope is that the cats will have a ﬁne life keepingthe rodents in check so that we can park by the barn againwithout providing warm, low-cost, tract housing in our air276dBECOMING COMPANION SPECIES




ducts for reproducing mice. Our felines are also supposed tokeep further feral cats from settling in nearby. I hope theyunderstand this contract! Meanwhile, bearing names fromthe Buﬀyand Dark AngelTV series, they are fat, sassy, andbeautiful. Come up soon and check out Spike (black male),Giles (black male), Willow (dark gray tabby female), andMax (light gray tabby female). You will notice that one of thestriped tabbies bears the name of bar code–marked Maxfrom Dark Angel.We’d change Willow’s name if you could come up withanother bar code–marked TV character. Any ideas?Landmate Susan Caudill and Rusten decided thatour cats have undergone the deﬁning experience of alienabduction—lifted out of one’s home without warning bystrange-looking giants of unknown origin, held in darkisolation for a period, brought to a chrome- and light-ﬁlledmedical facility and subjected to penetration with needlesand forced reproductive alterations, returned to one’s originallocation and released as if nothing had happened, andexpected to carry on until the next abduction at someunknown future time.As beings who have undergone surgery and vaccinationand therefore been interpellated into the modern biopoliticalstate, these cats have earned names to go with their historicalidentities and subject status. Just think, when else and whereelse in hominid–feline cohistories would the oﬀspring of adead feral cat.be taken up by a household of overeducated,scientiﬁcally trained, middle-aged war resisters;.be aided by an animal welfare volunteer organizationwith a quasi-wilderness ideology and a soft spot foranimal-rights speak;.become the recipient of the donated time and servicesof a vet trained at a post–Civil War, land grant, science-based university and his technical staﬀ;BECOMING COMPANION SPECIESd277




.be caught with a trap-and-release technology designedto get rid of vermin without the moral blot of killingthem (the same technology designed to relocate wildlifein national parks and such);.receive serums tied to the history of immunology andto Pasteur in particular;.be fed MaxCat specially formulated kitten foodcertiﬁed by a national standards organization andregulated by food-labeling laws;.be named for a teenage vampire killer and geneticallyengineered characters on U.S. television;.and still have the status of wild animals?Is this what Muir meant? In wilderness is our hope . . .Much love,Donnap.s.: a philosophical postscriptInterpellationis taken from French post-structuralist,Marxist, philosopher Louis Althusser’s theory for howsubjects are constituted from concrete individuals by being“hailed” through ideology into their subject positions inthe modern state. Early in the twentieth century, the Frenchrescued the word from obsolescence (before inEnglish and French, to interpellatehad meant “to interruptor break in on speech”) to refer to calling on a minister inthe legislative chamber to explain the policies of the rulinggovernment. Today, through our ideologically loadednarratives of their lives, animals “hail” us animal people toaccount for the regimes in which they and we must live.We “hail” them into our constructs of nature and culture,with major consequences of life and death, health andillness, longevity and extinction. We also live with eachother in the ﬂesh in ways not exhausted by our ideologies.In that is our hope . . .278dBECOMING COMPANION SPECIES




p.p.s.: an update from December Life-table statistics have a way of coming true with avengeance, and the category called “feral” has a way of makingclaims on those fated to live and die there. Always the mosttame and the ﬁrst to enjoy morning scratch and ankle-twining sessions with provident humans at the food bowl,Spike was run over by a car when he was two years old. Wewere lucky a neighbor found his body in a drainage ditch andasked if he was ours. We found Willow dead one morningwith her front leg torn oﬀ, presumably by a raccoon from thecrowd of animals whom we did not intend to provision butwho had their own ideas about resources and power. Raidingthe cats’ food arrangements with aplomb, Steller’s jays by dayand raccoons by night engaged in what can only be called anarms race with us and the felines, as we tested variousorganisms’ (including our own) abilities to solve lock-and-key problems in a practice that would have made the fathersof comparative psychology proud. Our loyalty seemed duethe cats and not the jays and raccoons, because we hadproduced the food competition and invited—reallyengineered—the cats into semidependence on us.Giles and Max are still alive in December , butthey have each sustained serious abdominal and leg woundsfrom ﬁghts, from which they have healed, though notcompletely. They are burdened with tapeworms and probablyother parasites; we can see the dried tape segments near theiranuses. Their lives are palpably fragile. They are not pets;they do not get the care of a middle-class pet. They and wehave rituals of expectation and aﬀectionate touch enacted ona daily basis. Waiting for us from safe lookouts, or for ourlandmate Susan when Rusten and I are in Santa Cruz, thecats take dust baths in the gravel with enthusiasm when weappear, progressing to twining their bodies around hominidankles and soliciting food and grooming in communicativegestures familiar to all cat people. Max’s belly wound fromBECOMING COMPANION SPECIESd279




this summer is still draining. Giles’s rear leg seems healedfrom last year’s long rip and subsequent circulatoryinsuﬃciency and persistent ulceration. They are wild enoughthat the process of getting them to a vet would probably havecaused them worse injuries. And then what? Can cats raisedferal become traveling, middle-class, academic pets in twodiﬀerent territories, one urban and one rural? Whatobligations ensue from the experience of entangled lives oncetouch has been initiated?Their fur is shiny and eyes bright. Their high-endkibble diet is scientiﬁcally formulated and is probably whythey can resist infection so well. The lamb protein in thatdiet is derived from industrial sheep-raising and slaughteringsystems that should not exist, and the rice is hardly full ofmultispecies justice and well-being either, as anyone livingoﬀthe water politics of California agribusiness knows.Meanwhile, we aﬄuent humans won’t buy and eat thatparticular (cheap) meat for ourselves, and we try to buyorganic grains from sustainable agroecological farms. Who isfooling whom? Or is my wry indigestion a prick to trying todo better as companion species, individually and collectively,even while committed to permanent reexamination aboutwhat is better? The cats hunt avidly, and they still play witheach other, even with their life scars. I don’t care when I seeSteller’s jay feathers littering their hunting grounds; thoseavian populations are not threatened by domestic catsaround here. I do remember the statistics of songbird killsby even well-provisioned pet cats in many places—enoughto destabilize populations and add to the threat to alreadythreatened species. I wish I knew the score in my region, butI do not. Would I kill our feral cats if I learned they were aproblem for the local quail or other birds?As for the contract we put out on rodents (I will leaveunexamined the implicit category of vermin that fuels myunstably funny tone), our cats seem more into ranching thanpredator control. I am convinced they only crop surplus280dBECOMING COMPANION SPECIES




adolescent male rodents and carefully husband the pregnantfemales, ﬁnding them nice nests in our cars’ innards. At least,the barn’s various rodent populations seem to thrive in theirpresence. Would I know if our dusky-footed wood rat ordeer mice populations were in trouble? Does provisioningferal cats carry obligations to follow through on questions ofspecies diversity and ecological balances in microregions?Nothing about the multispecies relationships I amsketching is emotionally, operationally, intellectually, orethically simple for the people or clearly good or bad forthe other critters. Everything about these speciﬁc, situatedrelationships is shaped from inside middle-class, rural orsuburban, animal welfare– and rights–inﬂected, techno-scientiﬁc cultures. One thing seems clear to me after fouryears of living out—and imposing—face-to-face mutuallyopportunistic and aﬀectionate relationships with critters whoare no more and no less alien presences on this land than myhuman household and who would otherwise have died fouryears ago outside our ken: becoming feral demands—andinvites—becoming worldly just as much as any other speciesentanglements do. “Feral” is another name for contingent“becoming with” for all the actors.BECOMING EDUCATED: TEACHING U.S. HISTORY INA COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN SONOMA COUNTYWhat do feral cats have to do with community college students, besideshaving numbers assigned to them for tracking purposes and being requiredto get vaccinations? The short answer is that both classes of beings are“educated” through their intra-actions within historically situated tech-nology. When Species Meetis about the entanglements of beings in tech-noculture that work through reciprocal inductions to shape companionspecies. Certain domestic animals have played the starring roles in thisbook, but it should be clear by now that many categories of beings, in -cluding technological assemblages and college students, count as “species”enmeshed in the practice of learning how to be worldly, how to respond,BECOMING COMPANION SPECIESd281




how to practice respect. In the spring of , Evan Selinger, a science andtechnology studies colleague from philosophy, asked me to participate ina book he was coediting that posed a series of ﬁve questions to variousscholars generously classed as philosophers.1The little essay below isadapted from my reply to one of Selinger’s questions, namely, “If the his-tory of ideas were to be narrated in such a way as to emphasize techno-logical issues, how would that narrative diﬀer from traditional accounts?”“Ideas” are themselves technologies for pursuing inquiries. It’s notjust that ideas are embedded in practices; they aretechnical practices ofsituated kinds. That said, there is another way to approach this question.Several years ago I took a freshman course on American history oﬀeredat night at our local community college in Healdsburg, California, inorder to add to the enrollment ﬁgures so that the instructor, my husband,Rusten Hogness, could give me an F and thus have the freedom to givebetter grades to the real students, since the History Department insistedon grading to a strict curve. Among other pursuits, Rusten is a softwareengineer who then was working at a little Hewlett-Packard branch oﬃcewith fellow engineer friends. They all took the course for failing gradestoo, so that Rusten and his students could forget the curve and concen-trate on learning. A couple years before, Rusten had taken this course him- self from our housemate and friend, Jaye Miller, so that he could takean F and free up the curve for Jaye’s students. It was easy to sign up forcommunity college courses without supplying complete transcripts fromprevious education and without leaving much of a trail into further edu-cation or professional paths.Without giving away our identities or purposes to the other stu-dents, who were of varying ages and experiences, all of us rogue enrolleesactually worked pretty hard and joined in discussions all the time. Rustentaught the whole course through the history of technology, focusing onthings such as the shoe lasts, guns, surgeries, and potted meat of the CivilWar; the railroads, ranches, and mines of the Rocky Mountain West; thecalorimeters of food science in land grant colleges and their relation tolabor struggles; and P. T. Barnum’s populist testing of the mental acumenof visitors to his displays (were they a hoax? were they real? I seem to re -call that to be a famous philosophical query). Throughout the class, awide-ranging set of questions in philosophy, politics, and cultural history282dBECOMING COMPANION SPECIES




came together to think better about possible shapes of science and tech-nology. The idea that technology is relational practice that shapes livingand dying was not an abstraction but a vivid presence. The history ofa nation, as well as the history of ideas, had the shape of technology.Old and important books such as Sigfried Giedion’s MechanizationTakes Commandand Lewis Mumford’s Technics and Civilizationhelped us through the course’s conventional required textbook. The realstudents, as well as the faux failures, loved the course and knew a greatdeal more about “the history of ideas,” including things like informationand thermodynamics, as well as work, land rights, war, and justice, at theend of the term than at the beginning.Rusten loves to teach, and he is ﬁercely committed to democraticscientiﬁc and technical competence and literacy. He has always taughtwith as much of a hands-on approach as possible and with a bright eyeon the history of popular science and struggles for a more democraticsociety. We met in the s in the History of Science Department atJohns Hopkins, where he was a graduate student studying nineteenth-century French and American popular science, among other things. Hewas also teaching the natural sciences and mathematics, as well as historyand social studies, at the Baltimore Experimental High School. There,he constantly had his students hanging out in labs, hospitals, factories,and technology museums, and he taught politics, history, science, andtechnology as an integral part of Baltimore’s story as an industrial portcity with a fraught racial, sexual, and class history. He turned our kitcheninto a chemistry lab, literally, and persuaded the students to think aboutindustrial chemistry as well as the science and technology of cooking as away to nurture both the pleasure of the science and a better sense of howdivisions of labor and status work in science and technology.Years before, Rusten, a war resister and paciﬁst in the Vietnam era,had done two years of alternative service in the Muslim southern Philip-pines, teaching mathematics and philosophy in a little ﬁsheries collegeto students who were mostly dead a few years later from the repression ofboth separatist and revolutionary movements by the U.S.-supportedregime in Manila. Questions about technologies of globalization and of“antiterrorism” are indelibly written onto his optic tectum and in intimatecontact with whatever signals are working their way through the cerebrum.BECOMING COMPANION SPECIESd283




Rusten’s paternal grandfather, Thorﬁn Hogness, had headed thephysical chemistry division of the Manhattan Project and then partici-pated in civilian scientists’ struggles over the control of nuclear scienceand technology after the war. Perhaps as a result, most of Rusten’s siblingsand cousins are directly engaged in their working lives and their com-munity presence in “the history of ideas from a technological perspective”and vice versa. I tell this family story to foreground the knot of publicand intimate worlds tying together what we call technology and whatwe might mean by philosophical perspectives. I am not sure if this wayof approaching the question is traditional or not; it depends on whattradition one focuses on. But I am sure that I learned more U.S. historyand more history of philosophy, as well as history of technology, in theone course in my life that I failed than in a great pile of those othersmarked with A’s.284dBECOMING COMPANION SPECIES




12. PARTING BITESNourishing IndigestionKnowing is a direct material engagement, a practice of intra-acting withthe world as part of the world in its dynamic material conﬁguring, itsongoing articulation. . . . Ethics is about mattering, about taking accountof the entangled materializations of which we are a part, including newconﬁgurations, new subjectivities, new possibilities—even the smallestcuts matter.—Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe HalfwayOne never eats entirely on one’s own: this constitutes the ruleunderlying the statement, “One must eat well.” . . . I repeat,responsibility is excessive or it is not a responsibility.—Jacques Derrida, “Eating Well, or the Calculationof the Subject”Consider a northern hairy-nosed wombat, sometimes called thebulldozer of the bush, as she burrows intently in the dry wood-land ﬂoor of the Ebbing Forest National Park in central Queens-land, Australia. Keeping the dirt out, the female’s backward-facingpouch shelters a young joey attached to a teat on her belly. Includ-ing perhaps only twenty-ﬁve breeding females in the early years ofthe twenty-ﬁrst century, with adults weighing between ﬁfty-ﬁve andninety pounds, these roguish but vulnerable marsupials are among theworld’s rarest large mammals.1Consider also the cobbled together micro-scopic critter, Mixotricha paradoxa,literally, “the paradoxical one withmixed up hairs.” At about ﬁve hundred microns in diameter, the motleyof critters going by the name Mixotricha paradoxacan just be dis-cerned by the naked human eye. Not among the charismatic macro-fauna in anybody’s national park but nonetheless critical to recyclingnutrients in forests, these hard-working, cellulose-processing pro-tists live in the hind gut of a south Australian termite named Mas-totermes darwiniensis.2So much in Australia carries Darwin’sname and legacy.




It might seem tragically easy to count the Queensland wombats,if only these nocturnal and crepuscular, generally solitary, and secretivecritters would show themselves to the census takers.3Accounting forMixotricharaises another kind of numerical dilemma. Mixotricha,incitedby a scanning electron microscope, visibly bristles with its resistance toenumeration. The bristles—mistaken, at lower magniﬁcations, for ciliaon a comprehensible single cell—show themselves under the EM to behundreds of thousands of hairlike Treponemaspirochetes, whose motionpropels their cohabiting messmates through life, steered by four ﬂagellapoking out of the cone-shaped anterior end of the protist. Made up of anucleated cell and four sorts of bacterial microbes (whose diﬀerent kindsnumber from about to ,cells), with its ﬁve entangled genomes,“Mixotricha paradoxais an extreme example of how all plants and ani-mals—including ourselves—have evolved to contain multitudes.”4Thus,my conclusion begins with companion species nourished in the cavities,crevices, and interdigitations of gestation, ingestion, and digestion amongcritters indigenous to the southern continent.286dPARTING BITES

Mixotricha paradoxa.Scanning electronmicrograph, 750xmagnification, byDean Soulia and LynnMargulis, University ofMassachusetts atAmherst. Courtesy ofLynn Margulis.




Instructed by Eva Hayward’s ﬁngery eyes,5I remember that “be-coming with” is “becoming worldly.” When Species Meetstrives to buildattachment sites and tie sticky knots to bind intra-acting critters, includ-ing people, together in the kinds of response and regard that changethe subject—and the object. Encounterings do not produce harmoniouswholes, and smoothly preconstituted entities do not ever meet in the ﬁrstplace. Such things cannot touch, much less attach; there is no ﬁrst place;and species, neither singular nor plural, demand another practice of reck-oning.6In the fashion of turtles (with their epibionts) on turtles all theway down, meetings make us who and what we are in the avid contactzones that are the world. Once “we” have met, we can never be “the same”again. Propelled by the tasty but risky obligation of curiosity amongcompanion species, once we know, we cannot not know. If we know well,searching with ﬁngery eyes, we care. That is how responsibility grows.Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan suggested that the myriads of liv-ing organisms owe their evolved diversity and complexity to acts of sym-biogenesis, through which promiscuous genomes and living consortia arethe potent progeny of ingestion and subsequent indigestion among mess-mates at table, when everyone is on the menu. Sex, infection, and eatingare old relatives, hardly deterred by the niceties of immune discrimina-tion, whose material and syntactic intra-actions make the cuts that birthkin and kind. Let me suggest, then, parting bites that might nourish mor-tal companion species who cannot and must not assimilate one anotherbut who must learn to eat well, or at least well enough that care, respect,and diﬀerence can ﬂourish in the open.The ﬁrst bite returns us to the hairy-nosed wombat, this time withsome unexpected companions. Melbourne-based artist Patricia Piccininihas fabulated plausible companion species—her term—to protect thesouth ern continent’s endangered species, including the northern hairy-nosed wombat. She is suspiciously inquisitive rather than sanguine abouther introduced critters, even if their principal habitat is the art exhibi-tion, Web site, and catalog.7Alerting viewers to both danger and possi-bility, her drawings, installations, and sculptures palpably argue that shehas fallen in love with her sf-like progeny; she has certainly made me doso. Piccinini remembers Australia’s and Aotearoa New Zealand’s natural-cultural history of introduced species, human and nonhuman alike, withPARTING BITESd287




modern examples such as the South and Central American cane toad,shipped from Hawaii to northern Queensland in to munch repres-sively on the cane beetle that eats the sugar cane that gobbles up labor-ing people, who need the money from sugar to feed their children.8Sheremembers the exterminist consequences of well-intentioned introduc-tions of companion species—in this example, for the unintended meal,that is, the endemic amphibians gobbled up by voracious, proliﬁc, mobilecane toads.She knows that the African buﬀel grass planted for Europeancattle in the white settler colony outcompetes the native grasses on whichthe hairy-nosed wombats depend and that the threatened wombats con-tend for food and habitat with cattle, sheep, and rabbits. These marsupi-als also endure predation by dingoes, mammals dating from much earlierintroductions, who have achieved ecological charismatic macrofauna sta-tus today after a long career as vermin to Europeans and a longer historyas companion species to Aboriginals. Yet the modern rehabilitated nation- alist dingoes, even after the cattle have been evicted and the buﬀel grassdiscouraged in the work of ecological restoration, have to be fenced outof the patch of Queensland’s semiarid grassland and woodland that is theonly place left for northern hairy-nosed wombats to burrow and dine.But then, Piccinini knows, living beings in knotted and dynamicecologies are opportunistic, not idealistic, and it is not surprising to ﬁndmany native species ﬂourishing in both new and old places because of theresources provided by interlopers from other lands and waters. Think ofthe kookaburras, displaced from their own former ranges, eating intro-duced pest snails and slugs alongside European starlings. Piccinini knows,in short, that introducing species (from another watershed, another con-tinent, or another imagination) is often a world-destroying cut, as wellas sometimes an opening to healing or even to new kinds of ﬂourishing.9Piccinini’s fabulated companion species to endangered species may be onemore handy newcomer, among many, rather than a destructive invader,among many, or they may be both, the more usual course of things. Thecrucial question is not, Are they original and pure (natural in that sense)?but rather has to be, What do they contribute to the ﬂourishing and healthof the land and its critters (naturalcultural in that sense)? That questiondoes not invite a disengaged “liberal” ethics or politics but requires exam-ined lives that take risks to help the ﬂourishing of some ways of getting288dPARTING BITES




on together and notothers. Generally positive to animals Europeans havedisparagingly called “feral,” Australian Aboriginal peoples have tended toevaluate what Westerners call “species assemblages,” new and old, in termsof what sustains the human and nonhuman, storied, changing, cared-for,and lived world called “country,” as Anglophones hear the word.10AsBarad put it for ears tuned to Western philosophy and science: “Embod-iment is a matter not of being speciﬁcally situated in the world, but ratherof being of the world in its dynamic speciﬁcity. . . . Ethics is thereforenot about right response to a radically exterior/ized other, but about re -sponsibility and accountability for the lively relationalities of becoming ofwhich we are a part.”11Curiosity should nourish situated knowledges andtheir ramifying obligations in that sense.12Piccinini is also working explicitly in response to and in dialoguewith technoculture and its biotechnologies. Her series called Nature’sLittle Helpers queries the tangled naturalcultural life forms central toconservation practices and to assisted reproductive practices. Both ofthese technocultural apparatuses have been central to When Species Meet,in which the categories of “endangered species” have repeatedly over-ﬂowed with the pain and hopes of their ill-contained actors, even whenthe vulnerable ones are “merely” kinds of dogs and their multispecies, his-torically dynamic, situated ways of life.Made of silicone, ﬁberglass, hair, leather, and the goddess knows whatelse, a fabulated critter titled Surrogate (for the Northern Hairy-NosedWombat), is one of Nature’s Little Helpers. In the drawing James (sit-ting), ,a surrogate and a human baby sit face-to-face.13Intensely curi-ous and just maybe slightly apprehensive, little James looks ready to reachout (left-handed). I know that babies often hurt the animals they grab.I trained with my dogs and children on loan from my graduate students,so that the canids might tolerate such exploratory excesses by badly coor-dinated, unaccountable, tiny hominids unwisely endowed too early in theirdevelopment with grasping hands. Is the surrogate also well instructed?Why should s/he be? Surrogate and baby are close, maybe too close fora human child and an alien guardian species, who looks vaguely benignor maybe just pensive; who can read such a half-seen countenance? Theappealing, full-frontal surrogate in color on the cover of the exhibitioncatalog In Another Worlddoes not answer my doubts or Piccinini’s. ThePARTING BITESd289




creature’s ventral surface doessport a proper navel, indicating some kindof mammalian kinship, however reconﬁgured in technochimeras and how-ever foreign to the gestational needs of marsupial wombats. The surro-gate was not fabulated to be a protector of Homo sapiens,after all, but ofLasiorhinus kreftii,whose habitats and associates have been blasted by thevery species introduced by James’s kin. I am not sure what Queensland’sindigenous peoples call or called northern hairy-nosed wombats, although“Yaminon” is an Aboriginal name (whose?) for these animals, a name thatappears in conservation contexts today without discussion of the humanor nonhuman historical naturecultures that generated it. I am even lesssure what names diﬀerent Aboriginal peoples might give the dorsallyarmored surrogate.14But whatever the proper names, the surrogate couldreasonably decide that James and his kind do not fall under her (his?) writof protection.Handsome dorsal plates are the least of the interesting structuresrippling down the backside of the surrogate. Three pairs of gestational290dPARTING BITES

Patricia Piccinini, James (sitting),2006. Graphite on paper. Courtesy of the artist.




pouches run down the spine of the protector companion species, nur-turing three stages of wombat development. Aligned with that of othermarsupials such as the red kangaroo, surrogate wombat reproductionseems to be run on “just-in-time” principles for stocking embryos on thegestating body. Just out of the birth canal (whose?) and barely able tocrawl up the surrogate’s fur to wait its turn to ﬁnish making a wombat, abarely formed embryo surely inhabits the top pouch. Attached to a teat?Does the surrogate have teats in those odd sphincter-ringed, draw-stringpouches? How not? Normal northern hairy-nosed wombats have onlytwo teats in their single, backward-facing pouch, so they can’t handlethree young out of the body at once, and they give birth to only one youngat a time, once a year. Joeys stay in the pouch eight to nine months. Butif they are like kangaroos, these wombats could have arrested embryosready to speed up their life course if the senior joey dies—or is disap-peared by aliens. Northern hairy-nosed wombats like to have their babiesin the rainy season, and getting a replacement joey into the pouch toolate, when the succulent grasses are drying out, would not bode well forthat reproductive cycle anyway. Maybe the surrogates take just-emergedjoeys from wombat females and put them in their own pouches, thusforcing the wombats to birth another embryo from their body sooner andmultiplying the number of young who can be raised in a season. Thiswould not be the ﬁrst time that forced reproduction was employed as anevolutionary and ecological rescue technology! Ask any tiger in a SpeciesSurvival Plan database. No wonder Piccinini is suspicious as well as opento another world.The middle rung of surrogate pouches houses more developed butstill hairless baby wombats; they are far from ready to explore the out-side world. A teat, a pouch, and a vigilant surrogate’s armored spine areall that are required for now. The third rung of pouches holds maturefurry baby wombats, and one is crawling out of the pocket to begin itsrisky encounters in a wider world. For a few months, this joey can leapback into the pouch when things get too scary and supplement grasswith milk, but even the best wombs or pouches, alien or native, give time-limited protection.Again, I wonder if the surrogate is a male or female maternal crea-ture; my imperializing gender categories will not let the matter rest. OfPARTING BITESd291




course, this query is rooted in my historically situated neurosis (and itsbiological and reproductive discourses), not the surrogate’s. I am remindedthat only about twenty-ﬁve breeding female northern hairy-nosed wom-bats live on planet Earth to gestate the young of their species. Beingfemale in such a world never comes without paying the price of value.No wonder Piccinini felt called on to introduce her surrogates. I’d loveto call the surrogate “queer” and let it go with a celebratory frisson thatcomes so cost-free to those usually identiﬁed as heterosexual, but I amsure Piccinini would withdraw her permission to use her image if I triedto get away with that. The surrogate remains a creature that nourishesindigestion, that is, a kind of dyspepsia with regard to proper place andfunction that queer theory is really all about. The surrogate is nothing ifnot the mutter/matter of gestation out of place, a necessary if not suﬃ-cient cut into the female-deﬁning function called reproduction. To be outof place is often to be in danger and sometimes also to be free, in the open,not yet nailed by value and purpose.There is no fourth rung of guarded gestation. James may be facingthe surrogate, but I wager that the baby wombat and the baby human willﬁnd each other quickly in this narrative tableau. Then, what the world ofcompanion species might become is open. The past has not laid enoughground for optimism for relations between white settler humans andwombats. Yet the past is far from absent or lacking in rich oﬀerings forreworlding. Katie King oﬀers a theoretical tool she calls pastpresents tothink about the work of reenactment. She writes, “I think of pastpresentsas quite palpable evidences that the past and the present cannot be puri-ﬁed each from the other; they confront me with interruptions, obstacles,new/old forms of organization, bridges, shifts in direction, spinning dy -nam ics.”15With this kind of material–semiotic tool as companion, thepast, present, and future are all very much knotted into one another, fullof what we need for the work and play of habitat restoration, less deadlycuriosity, materially entangled ethics and politics, and openness to alienand native kinds symbiogenetically linked. In Barad’s terms, we have herethe world-making processes of intra-action and agential realism.Nibbling on the material–semiotic joint linking gestation and in-digestion—a connection well known to any marsupial, mammalian, orextraterrestrial critter of whatever gender who has ever been pregnant292dPARTING BITES




or just sympathetic—I oﬀer a second parting bite. In I applied fora tenured position in feminist theory in the History of Consciousnessprogram at the University of California at Santa Cruz. Actually, NancyHartsock and I applied to share the job, but Nancy withdrew to stay inBaltimore, and I pressed on, avid for the job. For years, people assumedNancy and I were lovers because we took action to share a job; that wayof surmising sexuality is surely interesting! But lamentably, it is outsidethe scope of this already too promiscuous book. The day of my job talk,I was picked up at the airport and delivered to the Dream Inn (whereelse?) by two HistCon graduate students, Katie King and Mischa Adams.They were in a hurry to get to a birth celebration in the Santa CruzMountains. A feminist lay midwife had assisted the birth, and there wasto be a feast to share a meal of the placenta. Coming from The JohnsHopkins University and its technoscientiﬁc and biomedical excesses, Iwas enthralled, altogether ready to celebrate the bloody materiality ofcommunity aﬃrmation in welcoming a baby human. Then I learned thatthe husband (of the placenta? of the mother? kin relations blurred) wasto cook the placenta before serving it. This seemed to bring the feast intoa yuppie orbit somehow, away from the mortal sacrament my Catholicformation respected. Would there be a tangy sauce? Things were out ofkilter, at least in my East Coast prepped imagination. But I did not havetime to worry; the job talk was pressing. Katie and Mischa took oﬀfor thefeminist, anarchist, pagan cyberwitch mountains, whose waters fed thehistory of consciousness in those years.16After the talk, my hosts took me out to dinner, and Katie andMischa joined us from their previous meal. As everybody savored an elab-orately eclectic ensemble of colorful, geographically fabulated foods atIndia Joze, no one discussed my passionately crafted lecture and its images.All attention, including mine, was focused on deciding who could, should,must, or must not eat the placenta. No one agreed; everyone made worldsgrow from their ﬁgure of the meal. Philosophy, the history of religion,folklore, science, politics, popular dietary doctrines, aesthetics: all werein play. One person insisted that proteins were proteins, and it did notmatter what the source was; the placenta was just biochemical food.Someone asked if Catholics before Vatican II could eat the placenta onFriday. The protein reductionist found herself in deep water fast. ThosePARTING BITESd293




who cited an ancient matriarchy or some indigenous oneness with natureas warrant for eating afterbirth material got repressive looks from thoseattentive to the primitivizing moves of well-intentioned descendants ofwhite settler colonies.Katie and Mischa reported a solemn, rather than festive, sharing ofbits of placenta—cooked with onions—in which friends shared nutrientsneeded by mother and baby at this moment of beginnings. That’s myidea of a terran sacramental feast. Our informants reported the event asa potluck, eaten separately from the placental ceremony. The world herewas not yuppie but hippie. Katie had brought soy milk that she had madein her kitchen. Health-conscious vegetarians at India Joze had some trou-ble with the low-ﬁber fare of the placenta, but the radical feminist veganat table decided that the only people who musteat the placenta werefellow vegans, because they sought meals from life and not from death.In that sense, the placenta was not food from killed or exploited animals.Some worried whether accumulated toxins were especially high in humanplacentas, especially if the mother were known to eat high on the foodchain. No one suggested placental zoonoses as a danger, because some-how no one saw cross-species connection in eating this ﬂesh that controlsthe relations between self and other in pregnancy’s commerce betweenmother and infant. Fresh from Marxist–feminist Baltimore habitats andsated on structuralism, I was still having trouble with the class play be-tween the raw and the cooked.One thing was clear: I had found my nourishing community atlast, even as its members began to look a little green around the gills whilethey contemplated their comestibles. This community was composed ofpeople who used their considerable intellectual skill and privilege to play,to tell serious jokes, to refuse to assimilate to each other even as they drewnourishment from one another, to riﬀon attachment sites, and to explorethe obligations of emergent worlds where untidy species meet. Thesepeople let me join them, and my stomach has never settled.There is a third and last parting bite necessary to explore how toproceed when species meet. No community works without food, with-out eating together.This is not a moral point, but a factual, semiotic, andmaterial one that has consequences. As Derrida put it, “One never eatsentirely on one’s own.”17That is a deeply unsettling fact if one wants a294dPARTING BITES




pure diet. Driven by such a fantastic desire, a diner’s only permitted foodwould be oneself, ingesting, digesting, and gestating the same withoutend. Maybe God can have a solitary meal, but terran critters cannot. Ineating we are most inside the diﬀerential relationalities that make us whoand what we are and that materialize what we must do if response andregard are to have any meaning personally and politically. There is noway to eat and not to kill, no way to eat and not to become with othermortal beings to whom we are accountable, no way to pretend innocenceand transcendence or a ﬁnal peace. Because eating and killing cannotbe hygienically separated does notmean that just any way of eating andkilling is ﬁne, merely a matter of taste and culture. Multispecies humanand nonhuman ways of living and dying are at stake in practices of eating.As Barad said about world-making relationalities, “Even the smallest cutsmatter.”18Derrida argued that any real responsibility must be excessive.The practice of regard and response has no preset limits, but giving uphuman exceptionalism has consequences that require one to know moreat the end of the day than at the beginning and to cast oneself with someways of life and not others in the never settled biopolitics of entangledspecies. Further, one must actively cast oneself with some ways of life andnot others withoutmaking any of three tempting moves: () being self-certain; () relegating those who eat diﬀerently to a subclass of vermin,the underprivileged, or the unenlightened; and () giving up on knowingmore, including scientiﬁcally, and feeling more, including scientiﬁcally,about how to eat well—together.In reference to the necessary, hard, ethical and political questionsposed by those deeply committed to joint human and nonhuman animalwell-being, among whom I number animal rights workers, I have touchedin this book on the struggle for a viable modern agropastoralism andagainst the meat–industrial complex. Much of my conversation takesplace in the intertextual play between writing above and below the line,between endnotes and foretext. But I have had too little to say about con-temporary hunting in technocultural societies, an activity in which kill-ing and eating are especially close. This is a huge and complicated topic,and I do not intend to enter it deeply. But I do want to recall a meal in myown academic community in order to say why every time I am confrontedby passionate positions that conﬁgure opponents as benighted, I ﬁndPARTING BITESd295




practices of truth in the supposedly benighted camp, practices that I need,that we need. This is a biographical fact that has become more than that;this fact is why I experience becoming worldly as a process of nurturingattachment sites and sticky knots that emerge from the mundane and theordinary. In my story here, the ordinary takes the form of our annual de -partmental party for faculty and graduate students. Fittingly, dogs comeback into the picture in this story as agents of multispecies kinship for-mation as well as hunting companions, friends, and sports partners.My colleague and friend Gary Lease is a religion studies scholarwith exemplary allergies to dogmatic theologies of all kinds, even in tinydoses. Lease also has a keen scholarly knowledge of the history of ritualin the ﬂeshly details of various practices of animal sacriﬁce, which inter-sect in a Venn diagram with hunting practices but are not the same thing.Understanding the aggregations and disaggregations of animal sacriﬁce andhunting is important for many reasons, including gaining some distancefrom assertions of identity made by both opponents and supporters, evenphilosophically sophisticated ones such as a number of ecofeminists, acommunity long dear to my heart, and Derrida, a more recent messmate.Histories are complex and dynamic in the human–nonhuman animal re -lations called hunting and do not lend themselves to typological reduction,except for purposes of hostile polemic, dogmatic purity, and hackneyedorigin stories, usually of the Man-the-Hunter genre. That does not meanwe are reduced to the god trick of an easy relativism about situated hunt-ing practices, any more than an easy relativism about any other practicein the quest to eat well together, to refuse to make classes of beings kill-able, and to inhabit the consequences of what we know and do, includingkilling. To repeat myself, outside Eden, eating means also killing, directlyor indirectly, and killing well is an obligation akin to eating well. Thisapplies to a vegan as much as to a human carnivore. The devil is, as usual,in the details.Lease is a consummate hunter, cook, host, and environmentalist withenviable public and private credentials of acting on his knowledgeable,aﬀective commitments. He knows a great deal about those he kills, howthey live and die, and what threatens their kind and their resources. Hisapproach is resolutely tuned to ecological discourses, and he seems tonedeaf to the demands individual animals might make as ventriloquized in296dPARTING BITES




rights idioms. My sleep is more haunted by these murmurings. But Leaseis far from deaf to the profoundly (and diversely) emotional and cognitivedemands individual animals and hunters make on each other. Leaseacknowledges and cares about nonhuman animals as sentient beings inthe ordinary sense of that term, even if technical knowledge of sentienceremains hotly contested. He certainly understands that the kinds of ani-mals he hunts feel pain and have rich emotions. He hunts all over theworld; he hunts regionally as often as he can; his home is full of whathe kills; and his generous table never oﬀers industrially produced meat.Small wonder that his practices would generate orgies of both pleasureand indigestion at our annual departmental feasts!I will focus on a whole feral pig roasting in Lease’s back yard inSanta Cruz, California, one spring evening a few years ago. Too easy,my reader might cry; feral pigs are pests, known environmental thugs rip-ping up the hillsides where proper native organisms ought to be living.People regularly call feral pigs “rototillers”; if burrowing wombats were asnumerous (and as alien?), their moniker of“bulldozers of the bush” mightwin them fewer fans in the ecological community. Feral pigs are “intro-duced species,” politely put, and invaders deserving what they get, in thexenophobic idiom of the immigration shy. I tracked some of that in a pop-ular Web site article called “Alien Invaders.”19Feral pigs lack suﬃcientpredatory pressure that needs to be supplied by human hunters, even ifextermination is not the goal. All true.20But feral pigs are not an easy case. They are a highly intelligent,opportunistic, socially adept, well armed, and emotionally talented lot,who have demonstrably strong feelings about one another and abouttheir hunters, both human and canine. Would you kill and eat a feral dogor a pet pooch eating more than his or her share of the world’s resources?Who determines such shares? Pigs have just as much claim on life as adog (and what about humans?), if social, emotional, and cognitive com-plexity is the criterion. Derrida got it right: There is no rational or natu-ral dividing line that will settle the life-and-death relations betweenhuman and nonhuman animals; such lines are alibis if they are imaginedto settle the matter “technically.”Whether posed in idioms of ecology or animal rights, right-to-lifediscourses are not going to solve the questions posed by that savory deadPARTING BITESd297




pig in Lease’s yard. Pigs do less damage to hillsides, watersheds, andspecies diversity than the industrial California wine industry, much lessthe real estate industry. The factory-farmed pork industry treats pigs (andpeople) like calculable production units. That industry is infamous forpolluting whole watersheds and damaging literally thousands of speciesas a result, including people. Adept hunters such as Lease treat pigs likewily animals with lives of their own. Lease has excellent ecological war-rant for hunting pigs, but he hunts lots of other kinds of animals who arenot considered raving environmental serial killers. However, he huntsonly in accord with strict conservation practices (often in relation to proj-ects that provide local, sustainable, skilled jobs for “endangered” people aswell) and with testable, revisable, fallible knowledge. He is ﬁerce aboutkilling with as little terror and pain as his skill makes possible, certainlymuch less than any raccoon I have witnessed pulling a cat apart or anycougar I envision killing a pig. Nonetheless, most people do not have toeat meat, and felines generally do; more peaceful alternatives exist forpeople. But the calculus of suﬀering and choice won’t solve the dilemmaof the departmental party either, and not only because all the alternativescarry their own burden of assigning who lives and who dies and how.The crisis the party faced was a cosmopolitical one, where neither humanexceptionalism nor the oneness of all things could come to the rescue.Reasonswere well developed on all sides; commitmentsto very diﬀerentways of living and dying were what needed to be examined together, with-out any god tricks and with consequences.Hunting, killing, cooking, serving, and eating (or not) a pig is a veryintimate personal and public act at every stage of the process, with majorconsequences for a community that cannot be—and should not be—composed along the lines of organic holism. Several diners in Lease’s yardthat spring not only refused to eat the succulent pork he served but alsoargued passionately that he was out of line to serve hunted meat. Theyargued that his kind of hospitality was an act of aggression not only tothe animals but also to the students and faculty. The department shouldadopt a vegan practice, they maintained, or at least a practice that didnot include the community’s facing the body of a whole animal for col-lective consumption. But feral pigs, hunters, eaters, and resisters are com-panion species, entangled in a messy meal with no sweet dessert to settle298dPARTING BITES




everybody’s digestion. In any case, sugar hardly seems the proper histori-cal antacid to hunting! What is to be done, if neither liberal relativism northe ﬁat of the self-certain of any stripe is a legitimate option?What actually happened is that Lease did not again hunt and cooka pig for the department. We all avoided conﬂict. Sliced deli meats seemedtolerable, if barely, and no real collective engagement on the ways of lifeand death at stake took place. Obligatory “good manners” foreclosed cos-mopolitics, with its kind of polite meetings. I think that was a greatloss, much worse than ongoing acid indigestion, because the diﬀerentapproaches could not all be assimilated, even while they all made truthclaims that could not be evaded. Or at least I felt them all pulling at myinnards, and I was not alone. Remembering the dinner at India Joze, Ilonged for the kind of serious play that the cooked placenta evoked. Butthe placenta was in the mountains, confronted by others, and the pig wasin Lease’s yard, confronted by the departmental diners. Besides, therearen’t many emotionally demanding, sentient placentas in the hills stalkedby hunters.I think cosmopolitical questions arise when people respond to seri-ously diﬀerent, felt and known, ﬁnite truths and must cohabit well with-out a ﬁnal peace. If one knows hunting is theologically right or wrong, orthat animal rights positions are dogmatically correct or incorrect, thenthere is no cosmopolitical engagement. Perhaps I project too much frommy own personal and political experience in these areas, and I am tooeasily swayed by friendships and, face-to-face (or book-to-book), gettinghow the world is to someone else. But these qualities are among thosethat deﬁne the talents of social animals like us, and I think we ought tomake more, not less, use of them when species meet. In the sense I havetried to develop in this book, I respect Lease’s hunting practices in mybones, and I eat his food with gratitude. In the same sense, I respect friendsand colleagues such as Carol Adams, Lynda Birke, and Marc Bekoﬀ, allof whom are scholars and activists whose love of animals leads them tooppose meat eating and hunting of all sorts, not just factory farming.21Bekoﬀ, a behavioral biologist and tireless animal advocate, acknowledgesthat some hunters, like Lease, experience and practice love for the animalsthey kill, and he remarks that he is very glad such hunters do not love him.It ishard to imagine. But Lease and Bekoﬀare messmates in too manyPARTING BITESd299




ways for that to be the last word. They are both deeply knowledgeableand active animal advocates, both alert to the nonanthropomorphic com-petences of many kinds of animals, both environmentalists with solidcredentials in the world, both open to play and work with nonhuman ani-mals, both committed to knowing well and eating well. That I feel themboth in my gut is not relativism, I insist, but the kind of pain that simul-taneously true and unharmonizable things cause. Dialectics is a powerfultool for addressing contradictions, but Bekoﬀand Lease do not embodycontradictions. Rather, they embody ﬁnite, demanding, aﬀective, and cog-nitive claims on me and the world, both sets of which require action andrespect without resolution. That’s my idea of nourishing indigestion, anecessary physiological state for eating well together.It’s late afternoon in December, time for my canine and humanhousehold to go running together and come home to cook dinner. It’s timeto return to the ordinary knots of daily multispecies living in a particularplace and time. If I ignore this simple fact, a determined dog’s paws willbe on my keyboard typing strange codes I may not know how to delete.Throughout this book, I have tried to ask how taking such things seriouslydraws us into the world, makes us care, and opens up political imagina-tions and commitments. Almost eight years ago, I found myself in unex-pected and out-of-bounds love with a hot red dog I named Cayenne. It isnot surprising that she acted as a kin maker in a middle-class U.S. homein the early twenty-ﬁrst century, but it has been an awakening to trackhow many sorts of kin and kind this love has materialized, how manysorts of consequences ﬂow from her kiss. The sticky threads proliferat-ing from this woman–dog tangle have led to Israeli settler ranches onthe Golan Heights in Syria, French bulldogs in Paris, prison projects inthe midwestern United States, investment analyses of canine commodityculture on the Internet, mouse labs and gene research projects, baseballand agility sports ﬁelds, departmental dinners, camera-toting whales oﬀAlaska, industrial chicken-processing plants, history classrooms in a com-munity college, art exhibitions in Wellington, and farm-supply participantsin a feral cat trap-and-release program. Oﬃcial and demotic philosophers,biologists of many kinds, photographers, cartoonists, cultural theorists, dogtrainers, activists in technoculture, journalists, human family, students,friends, colleagues, anthropologists, literary scholars, and historians all300dPARTING BITES




enable me to track the consequences of love and play between Cayenneand me. Like Ian Wedde’s Vincent, she enriches my ignorance.22When Species Meetworks by making connections, by trying to re -spond where curiosity and sometimes unexpected caring lead. No chap-ter has a bottom line, but they all have barely contained traﬃc betweenthe lines and between the foretext and endnotes in an attempt to engagea cosmopolitical conversation. Animals are everywhere full partners inworlding, in becoming with. Human and nonhuman animals are compan-ion species, messmates at table, eating together, whether we know how toeat well or not. Many pithy slogans might urge us on in trying to learnmore about how to ﬂourish together in diﬀerence without the telos ofa ﬁnal peace. A rough one from the dog world might be, “Shut up andtrain!” But I prefer to end with a longing that it might be said of me some-day what good agility players say of those whose runs they admire, “Shehas met her dog.”PARTING BITESd301




This page intentionally left blank 




1. WHEN SPECIES MEET1.Beatriz Preciado, who teaches about technologies of gender at theMuseum of Contemporary Art in Barcelona and about queer theory, prosthetictechnologies, and gender in Paris, introduced me both to nuances of the termsalter-globalisationand autre-mondialisationand to the cosmopolitan pooch Pepa,who walks the cities of Europe in the French lesbian canine traditions, markinga kind of worldliness of her own. Of course, autre-mondialisationhas many lives,some of which can be tracked on the Internet, but the versions Preciado gave meanimate this book. In a manuscript she sent me in August , Preciado wrote:“Fabricated at the end of the nineteenth-century, French bulldogs and lesbiansco-evolve from being marginal monsters into becoming media creatures andbodies of pop and chic consumption. Together, they invent a way of survivingand create an aesthetics of human–animal life. Slowly moving from red-lightdistricts to artistic boroughs all the way to television, they have ascended thespecies pile together. This is a history of mutual recognition, mutation, traveland queer love. . . . The history of the French bulldog and that of the workingqueer woman are tied to the transformations brought on by the industrial revo-lution and the emergence of modern sexualities. . . . Soon, the so-called Frenchbulldog became the beloved companion of the ‘Belles de nuit,’ being depicted byNOTES




artists such as Toulouse Lautrec and Degas in Parisian brothels and cafes. [Thedog’s] ugly face, according to conventional beauty standards, echoes the lesbianrefusal of the heterosexual canon of female beauty; its muscular and strong bodyand its small size made of the molossethe ideal companion of the urban ﬂâneuse,the nomad woman writer and the prostitute. [By] the end of the nineteenth cen-tury, together with the cigar, the suit or even writing [itself], the bulldog becamean identity accessory, a gender and political marker and a privileged survivalcompanion for the manly woman, the lesbian, the prostitute and the gender rev-eler [in] the growing European cities. . . . The French bulldog’s survival opportu-nity really began in , when a group of Parisian Frenchy breeders and fansbegan to organize regular weekly meetings. One of the ﬁrst members of theFrench bulldog owners club was Madame Palmyre, the proprietor of the club ‘LaSouris’ located in the lower reaches of Paris in the area of ‘Mont Martre’ and‘Moulin Rouge.’ This was a gathering place for butchers, coachmen, rag traders,café owners, barrow boys, writers, painters, lesbians and hookers. Lesbian writ-ers Renée Vivien and Natalie Cliﬀord Barney and Colette, as well as modernistwriters such as Catulle Mendes, Coppée, Henry Cantel, Albert Mérat and LéonCladel gathered together with bulldogs at La Souris. Toulouse Lautrec immor-tal ized ‘bouboule,’ Palmyre’s French bulldogs, walking with hookers or eatingat their tables. Representing the so-called dangerous classes, the scrunched-upfaces of the bulldog, as those of the manly lesbians, were part of the modern aes-thetic turn.Moreover, French writer Colette, friend of Palmyre and customerof La Souris, would be one of the ﬁrst writers and political actors to be alwaysportrayed with her French bulldogs, and most specially her beloved ‘Toby-Le-Chien.’ By the early s, the French bulldog had become a bioculturalcompanion of the liberated woman and writer in literature, painting, and theemerging media.”2.For a larger discussion of contact zones, see chapter , “Training in theContact Zone.”3.Thanks to History of Consciousness graduate student Eben Kirkseyfor that reference and for his organizing the “Multispecies Salon” in November, at UC Santa Cruz.4.Fingery eyesis Eva Hayward’s term for the haptic–optic join of camerawith marine critters, especially invertebrates, at the multiple interfaces of water,air, glass, and other media through which visual touch occurs in art and science.See Eva Hayward, “Fingery-Eyes: What I Learned from Balanophyllia elegans,”for the Encyclopedia of Human–Animal Relationships,ed. Marc Bekoﬀ(West-port, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, forthcoming).304dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




5.Intra-actionis Karen Barad’s term. By my borrowing, I also touch herin Jim’s dog. Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics andthe Entanglement of Matter and Meaning(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,).6.Paul Rabinow, Essays on the Anthropology of Reason(Princeton, N.J.:Princeton University Press, ), argues for the virtue of curiosity, a diﬃcultand often corrosive practice that is not much honored in U.S. culture, no mattermy views about obligation and pleasure.7.A. N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World,Lowell Lectures,(New York: Mentor Books, ). Whitehead writes: “An event is thegrasping into unity of a pattern of aspects. The eﬀectiveness of an event beyonditself arises from the aspects of itself which go to form the prehended unities ofother events” ().8.I discuss these kinds of technocultural images in Donna Haraway,Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium(New York: Routledge, ), –,–, –.9.My alliance with Bruno Latour in Politics of Nature: How to Bring theSciences into Democracy(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, ) andin We Have Never Been Modern,trans. Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, ) is obvious here and often in my explorationsof how “we have never been human.” That suggestive title has also been usedto allied eﬀect by Eduardo Mendieta, “We Have Never Been Human or, HowWe Lost Our Humanity: Derrida and Habermas on Cloning,” Philosophy Today,SPEP Supplement (): –; and Brian Gareau, “We Have Never BeenHuman: Agential Nature, ANT, and Marxist Political Ecology,” Capitalism,Nature, Socialism, no. (December ): –. I am indebted also to DonIhde, Bodies in Technology(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, ),for his readings of Merleau-Ponty’s “infoldings of the ﬂesh” and much else.10.See Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel, eds., Making Things Public: Atmo -s pheres of Democracy(Karlsruhe: ZKM Center for Arts and Media; and Cam-bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, ) for a wealth of worlds no longer beholden tothe Great Divides.11.All of these words, technology,nature,organic,and more generate pro-tean webs of meaning that have to be addressed in intimate historical detail. Buthere, I want to foreground the still readily heard oppositions and assumed trans-parencies of meanings in still current idioms.12.Jacques Derrida, “And Say the Animal Responded?” trans. David Wills,in Zoontologies: The Question of the Animal,ed. Cary Wolfe (Minneapolis:NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d305




University of Minnesota Press, ), –, . In an e-mail dated Septem-ber , , Isabelle Stengers reminded me that Freud was conducting an exclu-sionary propaganda war for his own theory of the unconscious by means of hisapparatus of narcissistic wounds and their treatment. Human exceptionalismhas not been the only Western tradition, much less a universal cultural approach.Stengers was most annoyed by the third wound, in which Freud seems toaddress Descartes and Cie, “but which also entails blanket judgment about tra-ditional soul healing crafts, which get assimilated to sheer suggestion.” Derridadoes not address this matter because the orthodox Cartesian tradition is histarget. The pity is that this tradition stands for the West tout courtin so muchphilosophy and critical theory, a fault of which I have been as guilty as anyone.For a crucial corrective, see Erica Fudge, Brutal Reasoning: Animals, Rationality,and Humanity in Early Modern England(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,). The question Derrida takes on is how “to break with the Cartesian tradi-tion of the animal–machine that exists without language and without the abil-ity to respond,” but only to react (). To do that, it is not enough to “subvert”the subject; the topography of the Great Divide that maps the animal in generaland the human in generalhas to be left behind in favor of “the whole diﬀerenti-ated ﬁeld of experience and of life-forms” (). Derrida argues that the trulyphilosophically scandalous (and psychoanalytically revealing) move in positinghuman exceptionalism, and so dominion, is lessrefusing “the animal” a long listof powers (“speech, reason, experience of death, pretense of pretense, coveringof tracks, gift, laughter, tears, respect, and so on—the list is necessarily with-out limit”) and more“what calls itself human” rigorously attributing to man, tohimself, such self-constituting attributes (). “Traces erase (themselves), likeevery thing else, but the structure of the trace is such that it cannot be in any-one’s powerto erase it. . . . The distinction might appear subtle and fragile but itsfragility renders fragile all the solid oppositions that we are in the process oftracking down” ().13.A useful analysis of the nonteleological heart of Darwinism can befound in Elizabeth Grosz, The Nick of Time: Politics, Evolution, and the Untimely(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ).14.Yudhijit Bhattarcharjee, “Evolution Trumps Intelligent Design in Kan-sas Vote,” Science(August , ): .15.In a survey of adults in thirty-two European nations and theUnited States and a similar query of the Japanese, only people in Turkeyexpressed more doubts about evolution than U.S. Americans, whereas per-cent of Icelanders were comfortable with the idea that “human beings, as we306dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




know them, developed from earlier species of animals.” About percent of U.S.adults surveyed either did not “believe” in evolution or expressed doubts. Overthe last twenty years, the percentage of adults in the United States acceptingevolution has declined from percent to percent. The percentage of adultsnot sure of their position increased from percent in to percent in .See Jon Miller, Eugenie Scott, and Shinji Okamoto, “Public Acceptance of Evolu -tion,” Science(August , ): –; New York Times,Tuesday, August, , D. I do not ﬁnd it strange that these doubts about the histories ofhuman evolution go along with hypertrophied faith in certain kinds of engi-neering and in war-making and proﬁt-extraction technologies. Science is not one.16.With little feet growing from its ventral surface for moving from saltyseas to dry land in the great evolutionary adventure, the Darwin ﬁsh is a sym-bol generally understood to be a parodic reply to the Christian Jesus ﬁsh (nofeet) on car bumpers and refrigerator doors of fellow citizens. Check out www.darwinﬁsh.com; the opportunity to market a commodity is never missed.One can also purchase a ﬁsh design with geﬁlteinscribed in it. As Wikipedia(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parodies_of_the_ichthys_symbol)tells us, “TheDarwin ﬁsh has led to a minor arms race in bumper stickers. A design was madewith a larger ‘Jesus ﬁsh’ eating the Darwin ﬁsh. Sometimes, the larger ﬁsh con-tains letters that spell the word ‘truth.’ A further step shows two ﬁsh, one withlegs labeled ‘I evolved,’ the other without legs labeled ‘You didn’t.’”17.John Paul Scott and John L. Fuller, Genetics and Social Behavior ofthe Dog(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ). For a discussion of thisresearch project in biological, political, and cultural contexts, see Donna Haraway,“For the Love of a Good Dog,” in Genetic Nature/Culture,ed. Alan Goodman,Deborah Heath, and M. Susan Lindee (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University ofCalifornia Press, ), –. In my account I drew heavily on Diane Paul,“The Rockefeller Foundation and the Origin of Behavior Genetics,” in The Pol-itics of Heredity(Albany: State University of New York Press, ). On August, , Faye Ginsburg e-mailed me, “Paul Scott was like an uncle to me, andmy dad has spent a good part of his life studying the evolution of canine be-havior as a social process. [I] played with [my father’s] wolves as a kid, not tomention the coy-dog and other unfortunate creatures. . . . I should dig out theDecember , issue of Lookmagazine with me romping with the wolves andplaying with super aggressive inbred rabbits!!!” The lab also had dingoes. Fayedid dig out the article, complete with great pictures of wolf and girl in properface-to-face greeting and in play. For the photos and more, see “Nurturing theGenome: Benson Ginsburg Festschrift,” June –, , http://ginsburgfestNOTES TO CHAPTER 1d307




.uconn.edu/. Faye Ginsburg studies Indigenous digital media production andconsumption, as well as disability and public culture. See Faye Ginsburg, “ScreenMemories: Resignifying the Traditional in Indigenous Media,” in Media Worlds:Anthropology on New Terrain,ed. Faye Ginsburg, Lila AbuLughod, and BrianLarkin (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, ).18.This passage is taken from Donna Haraway, The Companion SpeciesManifesto: Dogs, People and Signiﬁcant Otherness(Chicago: Prickly ParadigmPress, ), –.19.I adapt the term becoming withfrom Vinciane Despret, “The Body WeCare For: Figures of Anthropo-zoo-genesis,” Body and Society, no. ():–. She reﬁgured the story of Konrad Lorenz with his jackdaws: “I suggestthat Lorenz became a ‘jackdaw-with-human’ as much as the jackdaw became insome ways a ‘human-with-jackdaw.’ . . . This is a new articulation of ‘with-ness,’an undetermined articulation of ‘being with.’ . . . He learns to be aﬀected. . . .Learning how to address the creatures being studied is not the resultof scientiﬁctheoretical understanding[;] it is the conditionof this understanding” (). Fora feminist extension of “becoming with,” see Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, “Think-ing with Care,” paper delivered at the meetings of the Society for Social Studiesof Science, Vancouver, B.C., November –, .20.Foundational theorists of intersectionality have been U.S. feminists ofcolor, including Kimberle Crenshaw, “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Raceand Sex,” in Feminist Legal Theory: Foundations,ed. D. Kelly Weisberg (Philadel-phia: Temple University Press, ), –; Angela Davis, Women, Race andClass(New York: Random House, ); Chéla Sandoval, Methodology of theOppressed(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, ); Gloria Anzaldùa,Borderlands/La Frontera(San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, ); and manyothers. For a primer, see “Intersectionality: A Tool for Gender and EconomicJustice,” Women’s Rights and Economic Change(August ), www.awid.org/publications/primers/intersectionality_en.pdf.21.For trenchant analysis, see Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthu-man: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics(Chicago: Uni ver-sity of Chicago Press, ); and Cary Wolfe, Animal Rites: American Culture,the Discourse of Species, and Posthumanist Theory(Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, ). The “posthumanities,” however, seems to me a useful notion fortracking scholarly conversations. On “conversation” (versus “debate”) as politicalpractice see Katie King, Theory in Its Feminist Travels(Bloomington: Indiana Uni- versity Press, ). King’s new book, Network Reenactments: Histories under Glob- alization(in preparation), is an indispensable guide to transknowledge makings308dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




and reenactments of many kinds, in and out of the contemporary university.King’s notion of pastpresents is particularly useful for thinking about how toinherit histories.22.See note above for “intersectionality.” Carol Adams, Neither Beastnor Man: Feminism and the Defense of Animals(New York: Continuum, ),–, argues persuasively for an intersectional, not an analogical, approach tothe needed allied oppositions to the deadly oppressions and exploitations of ani-mals and of categories of human beings who cannot fully count as “man.” Adamswrites: “That is, from a humanocentric perspective of oppressed peoples whohave been, if not equated with animals, treated like animals, the introduction ofanimals to resistance politics suggests that, once again, even in resistance humansare being equated with animals. But again this is a result of thinking analogically,of seeing oppression as additive, rather than comprehending the interlockingsystems of domination” (). Sandoval’s Methodology of the Oppressedhas devel-oped a robust theory of oppositional and diﬀerential consciousness that shouldforever prevent hierarchized analogical moves, in which oppressions are bothequated and ranked, rather than made to animate another kind of entanglementof becoming with one another that is attentive to the asymmetries of power.For varied ways of dealing with these issues, see also Octavia Butler,Fledgling(New York: Seven Stories Press, ); Alice Walker, “Am I Blue?” in Living bythe Word(New York: Harcourt Brace, ), –; Angela Davis, “Rape, Racism,and the Myth of the Black Rapist,” in Women, Race and Class,–; MarcieGriﬃth, Jennifer Wolch, and Unna Lassiter, “Animal Practices and the Racial-ization of Filipinas in Los Angeles,” Society and Animals, no. (): –; Eduardo Mendieta, “Philosophical Beasts,” Continental Philosophy Review,under review; and Mendieta, “The Imperial Bestiary of the U.S.,” in Radical Phi-losophy Today,vol. , ed. Harray van der Linden and Tony Smith (Charlottes -ville, Va.: Philosophy Documentation Center, ), –. In his search foranother logic of metamorphosis, Achille Mbembe, On the Postcolony(Berkeleyand Los Angeles: University of California Press, ), tracks the brutalization,bestialization, and colonization of African subjects in philosophy and history. Inmy experience of writing on the topic, the readiness with which taking animalsseriously is heard to be an animalization of people of color is a shocking re -minder, if one is needed, of how potent colonial (and humanist) tools of analogyremain, including in discourses intended to be liberatory. Rights discourse strug-gles with this legacy. My hope for companion species is that we might strugglewith diﬀerent demons from those produced by analogy and hierarchy linking allof ﬁctional man’s others.NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d309




23.Sha La Bare, writing on sf and religion, Ursula LeGuin, farfetchings,Afro-futurism, Scientology, and the sf mode as historical consciousness, taughtme to pay attention to the sf tones of “species.” Sha La Bare, “Science Fiction:Theory and Practice,” PhD dissertation in progress, History of ConsciousnessDepartment, University of California at Santa Cruz.24.Anna Tsing, “Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species,”in Thinking with Donna Haraway,ed. Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi (Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming). See also Anna Tsing, Friction: An Ethnographyof Global Connection(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, ), espe-cially chapter , “A History of Weediness.”25.Jacques Derrida, “The Animal That Therefore I Am (More to Fol-low),” trans. David Wills, Critical Inquiry(Winter ): –. Furtherreferences to this essay are in parentheses in the main text. This essay is the ﬁrstpart of a ten-hour address Derrida gave at the third Cerisy-la-Salle conferencein . See Jacques Derrida, L’animal autobiographique,ed. Marie-Louise Mal-let (Paris: Galilée, ).26.“Conﬁned within this catch-all concept, within this vast encampmentof the animal, in the general singular . . . are all the living thingsthat man does notrecognize as his fellows, his neighbors, or his brothers. . . . Animals are my con-cern. . . . I will venture to say that never, on the part of any great philosopher fromPlato to Heidegger, or anyone at all who takes on, as a philosophical question inand of itself,the question called that of the animal . . . have I noticed a protesta-tion of principle. . . against the general singular that is the animal.. . . The confu-sion of all nonhuman living creatures within this general and common categoryof the animal is not simply a sin against rigorous thinking . . . but a crime of theﬁrst order against the animals, against animals” (, , , ).27.I highlight “once its protocol is properly established” to diﬀerentiatethe kind of question that needs to be asked from the practice of assessing non-human animals in relation to human ones by checking the presence or absenceof a potentially inﬁnite list of capacities, a process that Derrida so rightly re -jected. What is at stake in establishing a diﬀerent protocol is the never denota-tively knowable, for human or nonhuman animals, relationof response. Derridathought Bentham’s question avoided the dilemma by pointing not to positivecapabilities assessed against one another but to “the non-power at the heart ofpower” that we share with the other animals in our suﬀering, vulnerability, andmortality. But I am not satisﬁed with that solution; it is only part of the neededreformulation. There is an unnamable being/becoming with in copresence thatBarbara Smuts, below, will call something we taste rather than something we310dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




know, which is about suﬀering andexpressive, relational vitality, in all the vul-nerable mortality of both. I am (inadequately) calling that expressive, mortal,world-making vitality “play” or “work,” not to designate a ﬁxable capability inrelation to which beings can be ranked, but to aﬃrm a kind of“non-power at theheart of power” other than suﬀering. Maybe a usable word for this is joy.“Mor-tality . . . as the most radical means of thinking the ﬁnitude we share with ani-mals” does not reside only in suﬀering, in my view. (Both quotations come from“The Animal That Therefore I Am,” .) Capability (play) and incapability(suﬀering) arebothall about mortality and ﬁnitude. Thinking otherwise comesfrom the ongoing oddities of dominant Western philosophical conversations,including those Derrida knew best and undid so well most of the time. Somekinds of Buddhist idioms might work better here and be closer to what Derridameant by establishing a diﬀerent protocol from Bentham’s to ask about suﬀer-ing, but other idioms oﬀer themselves from many varied and mixed traditions aswell, some of which are “Western.” I want a diﬀerent protocol for asking about alot more than suﬀering, which at least in U.S. idioms will regularly end in theself-fulﬁlling search for rights and their denial through abuse. I am more worriedthan Derrida seems to be here about the way animals become discursive victimsand little else when the protocols are notproperly established for the question,Can animals suﬀer? Thanks to Cary Wolfe for making me think more about thisunsolved problem in this chapter.28.Emmanuel Lévinas, “The Name of a Dog, or Natural Rights,” in Diﬃ-cult Freedom: Essays on Judaism,trans. Sean Hand (Baltimore: Johns HopkinsUniversity Press, ), –. Lévinas movingly tells the story of the straydog called Bobby, who greeted the Jewish prisoners of war as they returned fromwork each day in a German forced-labor camp, restoring to them knowledge oftheir humanity. “For him, there was no doubt that we were men. . . . This dog wasthe last Kantian in Nazi Germany, without the brain needed to universalizemaxims and drives” (). Thus was Bobby left on the other side of a GreatDivide, even by a man as sensitive as Lévinas was of the service rendered bythis dog’s look. My favorite essay in animal studies and philosophy on the ques-tion of Bobby and whether an animal has “face” in Lévinas’s sense is by H. PeterSteeves, “Lost Dog,” in Figuring the Animal: Essays in Animal Images in Art, Lit-erature, Philosophy, and Popular Culture,ed. Catherine Rainwater and Mary Pol-lack (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, ), –. See also H. Peter Steeves,The Things Themselves: Phenomenology and the Return to the Everyday(Albany:State University of New York Press, ). For a full explication of the manyways the dog Bobby “traces and retraces the oppositional limits that conﬁgureNOTES TO CHAPTER 1d311




the human and the animals,” see David L. Clark, “On Being ‘the Last Kantianin Nazi Germany’: Dwelling with Animals after Lévinas,” in Animal Acts,ed.Jennifer Ham and Matthew Senior (New York: Routledge, ), –, .On Derrida and others in the Continental philosophical canon on animals, seeMatthew Calarco, Zoographies: The Question of the Animal from Heidegger toDerrida(New York: Columbia University Press, forthcoming).29.The book based on that and subsequent research is Barbara Smuts,Sex and Friendship in Baboons(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,). I wrote about Smuts in Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in theWorld of Modern Science(New York: Routledge, ), –, –, –. See also Shirley Strum, Almost Human: A Journey into the World of Baboons(New York: Random House, ). When I wrote Primate Visions,I think Ifailed the obligation of curiosity in much the same way I suggest Derrida did.I was so intent on the consequences of the Western philosophical, literary, andpolitical heritage for writing about animals—especially other primates in the so-called third world in a period of rapid decolonization and gender rearrange-ments—that I all but missed the radical practice of many of the biologists andanthropologists, women and men both, who helped me with the book, that is,their relentless curiosity about the animals and their tying themselves into knotsto ﬁnd ways to engage withthese diverse animals as a rigorous scientiﬁc practiceand not a romantic fantasy. Many of my informants for Primate Visionsactuallycared most about who the animals are; their radical practice was an eloquentrefusal of the premise that the proper study of mankind is man. I, too, often mis-took the conventional idioms of the philosophy and history of science spoken bymost of “my” scientists for a description of what they did. They tended to mis-take my grasp of how narrative practice works in science, how fact and ﬁctioncoshape each other, to be a reduction of their hard-won science to subjective sto-rytelling. I think we needed each other but had little idea of how to respond.Smuts, as well as such people as Alison Jolly, Linda Fedigan, Shirley Strum, andThelma Rowell, continued to engage with me then and later with a mode ofattention that I call generous suspicion, which I regard as one of the most impor-tant epistemological virtues of companion species. Out of the kind of respect Iidentify as mutual generous suspicion, we have crafted friendships for which Iam mightily grateful. See Shirley Strum and Linda Marie Fedigan, eds., PrimateEncounters(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ). Had I known in how to cultivate the curiosity I wanted from Derrida, I would have spent muchmore time at risk at ﬁeld sites with the scientists and the monkeys and apes, notin the facile illusion that such ethnographic ﬁeldwork would give the truth about312dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




people or animals where interviews and documentary analysis mislead, but asa subject-forming entanglement that requires response one cannot know inadvance. I knew I too cared about the actual animals then, but I knew neitherhow to look back nor that I lacked the habit.30.Barbara Smuts, “Encounters with Animal Minds,” Journal of Con-sciousness Studies, nos. –(): –, . Further page references arein parentheses in the main text.31.I did not write “smallest possible units of analysis” because the wordunitmisleads us to think that there is an ultimate atom made up of internal dif-ferential relatings, which is a premise of autopoiesis and other theories of organicform, discussed below. I see only prehensile turtles all the way up and down.32.On the creative force of the prosaic, the propinquity of things in manyregisters, the concatenation of speciﬁc empirical circumstances, the misrecogni-tion of experience by holding to an idea of the experience before having had it,and how diﬀerent orders of things hold together coevally, see Gillian Goslinga,“The Ethnography of a South Indian God: Virgin Birth, Spirit Possession, andthe Prose of the Modern World,” PhD dissertation, University of California atSanta Cruz, June .33.Barbara Smuts, “Embodied Communication in Nonhuman Animals,”in Human Development in the st Century: Visionary Policy Ideas from SystemsScientists,ed. Alan Fogel, Barbara King, and Stuart Shanker (Toronto: publica-tion of the Council on Human Development, forthcoming).34.When a run goes awry in agility, I hear my fellow dog sport peoplesay of the canine and human persons, “They look like they have never met; sheshould introduce herself to her dog.” A good run can be thought of as a sustainedgreeting ritual.35.Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind(Chicago: University ofChicago Press, ), –.36.Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalismand Schizophrenia,trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of MinnesotaPress, ), –. Further references are in parentheses in the main text.I am playing with the tones of the vegetable communication of “truck” andDeleuze and Guattari’s call-of-the-wild version of a wolf pack. The online worddetective (www.word-detective.com/) told me that “the archaic sense of ‘truck’means ‘dealings, communications, bargaining or commerce,’ and is heard todaymost often in the phrase ‘have no truck with,’ meaning ‘have nothing to do with.’The original form of the English verb ‘to truck’ appeared in the th-centurymeaning ‘to exchange or barter.’ One of the surviving uses of this sense of‘truck’NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d313




is in the phrase ‘truck farm,’ meaning ‘vegetables produced for market.’” We willsee in a minute what production for small markets has to do with setting out atwenty-third bowl and my sense of becoming with signiﬁcant others.37.Steve Baker, The Postmodern Animal(London: Reaktion Books, ),–, has much more appreciation than I do for Deleuze and Guattari’s work-ings of becoming-animal, but Baker too is annoyed by their treatment of petdogs and cats. Much as I do care about both literary and ﬂeshly dogs and cats,their well-being is not my core worry in reference to D&G’s becoming-animal.I think Baker misses the systematic nausea that D&G let loose in their chapterin response to all that is ordinary, especially evident in the ﬁgural wolf/dog con-trasts but not reducible to them. Multiplicities, metamorphoses, and lines ofﬂight not trapped in Oedipal and capitalist ﬁxities must not be allowed to workthat way. Sometimes the herculean eﬀorts needed to dodge various versions ofhumanism catapult one into empyrean lines of ﬂight proper only to the anom-alous gods at their buﬀed worst. I’d rather own up to the fraught tangle of relat-ings called “individuals” in idiomatic English, whose sticky threads are knotted inproliﬁc spaces and times with other assemblages, some recognizable as (humanand nonhuman) individuals or persons and some very much not. Individualsactu ally matter, and they are not the only kind of assemblage in play, even inthemselves. If one is “accused” of “uncritical humanism” or its animal equivalentevery time he or she worries about the suﬀering or capabilities of actual livingbeings, then I feel myself in the coercive presence of the One True Faith, post-modern or not, and run for all I am worth. Of course, I am indebted to Deleuzeand Guattari, among others, for the ability to think in “assemblages.”38.Unfairly, because D&G could not have known most of these things inthe late s in France or elsewhere, I think of trained therapy dogs working tobring autistic children into a social world where even human touch can becomeless terrifying, or pet dogs visiting the elderly to bring them back to an interestin a bigger life, or dogs accompanying teenagers with severe cerebral palsy inwheelchairs to help both with practical daily tasks like opening doors and evenmore with social interactions with other humans. I think of all the conversationsamong humans watching their canine buddies at an ordinary dog park that leadthem to a larger civic and artistic world, as well as exchanges about poop bagsand dog diets. These are not about becoming-animal, but they are about ordi-nary, daily becoming-with that does not seem very Oedipal to me. Claims abouteither bounded individuation or regression are always worth an empirical check;real dogs are ready to oblige. How world-building relations actually developbetween a human being and a dog is the subject of ethological and ethnographic314dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




research initiated by Adrian Franklin in Tasmania. See Adrian Franklin, MichaelEmmison, Donna Haraway, and Max Travers, “Investigating the TherapeuticBeneﬁts of Companion Animals,” Qualitative Sociology Review(special issue“Animals and People”) , no. (): –. Franklin is also savvy about howanimals, including dogs (in this case, dingoes), feature in disturbing colonial andpostcolonial nationalisms. See Adrian Franklin, Animal Nation: The True Storyof Animals and Australia(New South Wales: New South Wales Press, ).39.The passages on becoming-woman and becoming-child in A Thou-sand Plateaushave been the subject of many commentaries, both for D&G’sembrace of the feminine-outside-conﬁnement and the inadequacy of that move.However unintended, the primitivist and racialist tones of the book have notescaped notice either. In my calmer moments, I understand both what D&Gaccomplish and what this book cannot contribute to a non-Oedipal, antiracistfeminism. Rosi Braidotti is my guide to fruitfully learning from Deleuze (whowrote much more than A Thousand Plateaus) and, in my view, oﬀers much moretoward an autre-mondialisation. See Rosi Braidotti, Transpositions: On NomadicEthics(Cambridge, U.K.: Polity, ). For a wonderful book partly shapedby Deleuze’s sensibilities in Diﬀerence and Repetition(trans. Paul Patton [NewYork: Columbia University Press, ]), see Kathleen Stewart, Ordinary Aﬀects(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ), which is a subtle backstory ofthe emergent forces we call things like neoliberalism and advanced consumercapitalism.40.Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, Acquiring Genomes: A Theory ofthe Origins of Species(New York: Basic Books, ). Further references are inparentheses in the main text.41.Who knows if Lawrence’s “becoming-tortoise” referenced in A Thou-sand Plateaus() had any relation to the many versions of the “turtles all theway down story”! To track both the positivists’ and the interpretivists’ approachesto this narrative about nonteleological inﬁnite regress—the world rests on anelephant resting on a turtle resting on turtles all the way down—see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turtles_all_the_way_down. Stephen Hawking, CliﬀordGeertz, Gregory Bateson, and Bertrand Russell all got into the act of refashion-ing this quasi-Hindu tale. In a chapter of that title, Isabelle Stengers tells a “tur-tles all the way down” story involving William James, Copernicus, and a savvy oldlady, in Power and Invention: Situating Science,trans. Paul Bains (Minneapolis:University of Minnesota Press, ), –. See also Yair Neuman, “Turtles Allthe Way Down: Outlines for a Dynamic Theory of Epistemology,” Systems Re -search and Behavioral Science, no. (): –, available online. NeumanNOTES TO CHAPTER 1d315




summarizes: “The most serious problem facing epistemological research is howto establish solid foundations for epistemology within a recursive system ofknowing. The aim of this paper is to respond to this problem by presenting someoutlines for a dynamic theory of epistemology. This theory suggests that themost basic unshakeable unit of epistemology is a process of diﬀerentiation,which is a self-referential activity. This paper elaborates on this thesis and illus-trates its relevance to solving the problem of embodiment in Piaget’s geneticepistemology” (). The self-referential part is the trouble. I want an idiom forboth–and: “self-other referential” all the way down.42.“‘Autopoiesis,’ literally ‘self-making,’ refers to the self-maintaining chem-istry of living cells. No material object less complex than a cell can sustain itselfand its own boundaries with an identity that distinguishes it from the rest ofnature. Live autopoietic entities actively maintain their form and often changetheir form (they ‘develop’), but always through the ﬂow of material and energy.”Margulis and Sagan, Acquiring Genomes,. Their target was the notion that avirus, or a gene, is a “unit of life.”43.For his critique of autopoiesis, see Scott F. Gilbert, “The Genome inIts Ecological Context: Philosophical Perspectives on Interspecies Epigenesis,”Annals of the New York Academy of Science(): –. See also ScottGilbert, John Opitz, and Rudolf Raﬀ, “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Devel-opmental Biology,” Developmental Biology(): –, . For recipro-cal induction, see chapter , “Training in the Contact Zone.”Lest the reader think “turtles all the way down” is excessively mythologicalor literary, Gilbert directed me to the Turtle Epibiont Project at Yale, at www.yale.edu/peabody/collections/iz/iz_epibiont.html. Gilbert writes: “Interestingly, thenotion that turtles carry the world is a theme found in several cultures. Andwhile they might not support a universe, turtles do support considerable ecosys-tems on their backs.” E-mail from Gilbert to Haraway, August , .For the relevance of this discussion to the phenomena of immunology,see Donna Haraway, “The Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies: Constitutions ofSelf in Immune System Discourse,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and Women(New York:Routledge, ), –, –. For an update, see Thomas Pradeu andEdgardo Carosella, “The Self Model and the Conception of Biological Identityin Immunology,” Biology and Philosophy, no. (March ): –. Pradeuand Carosella summarize: “The self/non-self model, ﬁrst proposed by F. M.Burnet, has dominated immunology for years now. According to this model,any foreign element will trigger an immune reaction in an organism, whereas en -dogenous elements will not, in normal circumstances, induce an immune reaction.316dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




In this paper we show that the self/non-self model is no longer an appropriateexplanation of experimental data in immunology, and that this inadequacy maybe rooted in an excessively strong metaphysical conception of biological iden-tity. We suggest that another hypothesis, one based on the notion of continuity,gives a better account of immune phenomena. Finally, we underscore the map-ping between this metaphysical deﬂation from self to continuity in immunol-ogy and the philosophical debate between substantialism and empiricism aboutidentity” ().44.E-mail from Scott Gilbert to Donna Haraway, August , .45.Personal communication, August , .46.Drawing from second-generation cybernetic thinkers such as Hum-berto Maturana and Francisco Varela, Cary Wolfe reworks autopoiesis so that itcannot mean “self-organizing systems,” which is the chief complaint Gilbert andI have. Nothing “self-organizes.” Wolfe’s development of nonrepresentationalistcommunication is close to what I mean by companion species engaged in turtlingall the way down. The word autopoiesisis not the main problem, although I pre-fer to let it go because I do not think its meanings can be bent enough. WhatWolfe and I both insist on is ﬁnding an idiom for the paradoxical and indispen-sable linkages of openness and closure, called by Wolfe “openness from closure”repeated recursively. See Cary Wolfe, “In the Shadow of Wittgenstein’s Lion,” inZoontologies,ed. Cary Wolfe (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,), especially –. My thanks to Wolfe for pushing this question in hise-mail of September , . In Meeting the Universe Halfway(Durham, N.C.:Duke University Press, ), Karen Barad’s agential realism, phenomena, andintra-action provide another vital theoretical idiom for this conversation.47.The Soay are listed with the Rare Breeds Survival Trust in the UnitedKingdom, and St. Kilda is a “mixed” UNESCO World Heritage Site, designatedfor both natural and cultural signiﬁcance. The North American registry andbreeder organization can be tracked at www.soaysofamerica.org/.Soay woolﬁber enters Internet-mediated spinning and weaving circuits, and Soay meat isvalued in agropastoral local and global practices. A tannery sells certiﬁed-organicSoay skins, also by Internet. About one thousand Soay sheep on St. Kilda havecontributed DNA samples for an important database. Since the s, an “un-managed,” translocated Soay population on the island of Hirta, where people nolonger live, has been the subject of extensive ecological, behavioral, genetic, andevolutionary investigation. Archaeologists track the chemical residues of ancienttanneries and collect old Soay DNA from hides. From tourism, through mod-ern agropastoralism and opposition to factory farming, to comparative genomics,NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d317




all of this is technoculture in action. See www.soaysheepsociety.org.uk/; www.kilda.org.uk/; and T. H. Clutton Brock and J. Pemberton, Soay Sheep(Cam-bridge: Cambridge University Press, ).48.Thelma Rowell and C. A. Rowell, “The Social Organization of FeralOvis ariesRam Groups in the Pre-rut Period,” Ethology(): –.These ram groups were not her current beloved Soay but hardy U.S. Texas Bar-bados critters encountered before she retired from UC Berkeley and returned toLancashire. Note the article was published not in a sheep journal but in a majorbiobehavioral zoology journal, in which comparisons to monkeys, even if sur-prising, were normal scientiﬁc practice and not evidence for mental disorder. SeeThelma Rowell, “A Few Peculiar Primates,” in Primate Encounters,ed. ShirleyStrum and Linda Fedigan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), –,for a discussion of the history of studying what Rowell calls the “entertaining,squabbling species” such as people and many other primates (). Recent evi-dence from feral Soay indicates that they might shape their grazing patterns as afunction of the seasonal densities of parasites lying in wait on tall grass tufts. Bigpredators aren’t the only ones who count in the evolution of behavior. MichaelR. Hutchings, Jos M. Milner, Iain J. Gordon, Ilias Kyriazakis, and Frank Jackson,“Grazing Decisions of Soay Sheep, Ovis aries,on St. Kilda: A Consequence ofParasite Distribution?” Oikos, no. (): .49.Contending meanings of “the open” in Heideggerian philosophy andafter appear in chapter , “Training in the Contact Zone.”50.Vinciane Despret, “Sheep Do Have Opinions,” in Making Things Pub-lic,ed. Latour and Weibel, . I am indebted to Despret’s interview with Rowelland her interpretation of the biologist’s work in terms of “making available,” “thevirtue of politeness,” and the role of the twenty-third bowl. Thanks to Maria Puigde la Bellacasa for bringing the research DVD made by Didier Demorcy andVinciane Despret, Thelma Rowell’s Non-sheepish Sheep,to my graduate seminarin winter . Despret, Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Thelma Rowell, andSarah Franklin all infuse my writing here and elsewhere. With Sarah Franklin, Ivisited Rowell’s farm in March and had the privilege of meeting her sheepand turkeys and talking with her and Sarah about worlds of animals and people.For much more on worldly sheep in British and transnational life and technosci -ence, see Sarah Franklin, Dolly Mixtures(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,). Stengers’s former doctoral student Maria Puig de la Bellacasa was a visit-ing postdoc at UC Santa Cruz from to . Maria and other colleaguesand graduate students in our animal studies/science studies/feminist theorygrad seminar in winter helped shape my thinking about cosmopolitics, the318dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




twenty-third bowl, the open, and companion species. Thanks to all those in myanimal studies seminars in the last few years who meet in this book.51.Thelma Rowell, “Forest Living Baboons in Uganda,” Journal of Zoology(): –. See also Thelma Rowell, The Social Behaviour of Monkeys(Middlesex, U.K.: Penguin, ). Somewhat to her horror, this little bookbecame very popular among feminists in the s and ’s, including me, whohad a grudge against male dominance–hierarchy explanations of all things pri-mate. Haraway, Primate Visions,, , –, –.52.Running a working farm, Rowell accompanies any decision to kill ananimal for food or another reason with arrangements for slaughter on her land,to minimize trauma. Therefore, her animals must remain within informal ex -change and cannot be sold commercially. If animals are to be marketed, respon-sibility includes conditions from breeding to the human meal, shoes, or sweater,including travel and slaughter of the animals. In the context of the work to sus-tain valuable human–animal lifeways in contemporary terms, the Rare BreedSurvival Trust tries, imperfectly, to operationalize these responsibilities in theUnited Kingdom. Legal changes to allow the sale of meat when the working ani-mal has been slaughtered where he or she lived, and not limit home-slaughteredmeat to noncommercial circuits, are crucial to animal and environmental well-being in any meat-eating ecology. In the United States, a movement is growingto develop and legalize mobile slaughter units with certiﬁed inspectors. Suchpractices ought to be mandatory, not just permitted. Two consequences wouldbe no longer limiting such meat to upscale markets but making it the normfor everyone, and therefore greatly reducing meat-eating, since such responsiblepractices are incompatible with factory-scale slaughtering. The naturalculturalchanges inherent in both these points are immense. Currently, a mobile unit cankill about twelve hundred cows per year and serves at best small, niche-marketfarmers. An industrial slaughtering enterprise kills more than that number oflarge animals per day, with predictable consequences for human and nonhumanbrutalization and environmental degradation. Class, race, and regional well-beingare all at stake here for people; living and dying with less suﬀering are at stake formeat-, hide-, and ﬁber-producing working animals. For a point of view in Mon-tana, see “Mobile Slaughter Units,” News and Observer,May , , www.mycattle.com/news/dsp_topstories_article.cfm?storyid=. On serious workto reform slaughter practices and industrial animal welfare broadly, see TempleGrandin’s Web site, www.grandin.com. Her designs of less terrible industrialslaughter systems, with mandatory auditing for actual reduction of animal stress,are well known.NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d319




Less well known is her PhD dissertation at the University of Illinois,focused on the other end of the production process, that is, on environmentalenrichment for piglets so that their neural development and behavior can bemore normal (www.grandin.com/references/diss.intro.html).Still “normal” actual conditions for pigs are described and documented atwww.sustainabletable.org/issues/animalwelfare/: “Factory farmed pigs are bornin small crates that limit the sow’s mobility to the point where she cannot turnaround. As their mother lays [sic] immobile, unable make a nest or separate her-self and her oﬀspring from their feces, piglets are conﬁned in the crate together,prohibited from running, jumping and playing according to their natural ten-dencies. Once separated from their mother, pigs are conﬁned together in con-crete pens with no bedding or soil for them to root in. In such conditions, pigsbecome restless and often resort to biting other pigs’ tails as an expression ofstress. Rather than simply giving the pigs straw to play in, many factory farmoperators will cut oﬀtheir pigs’ tails in response to this behavior.”Four companies control percent of pork production in the UnitedStates. For a soul-chilling analysis of the hog industry, see Dawn Coppin’s sci-ence-studies and ethnographic PhD dissertation, “Capitalist Pigs: Large-ScaleSwine Facilities and the Mutual Construction of Nature and Society,” SociologyDepartment, University of Illinois, Champaign–Urbana, . See Dawn Cop-pin, “Foucauldian Hog Futures: The Birth of Mega-hog Farms,” Sociological Quar-terly, no. (): –. Coppin’s work is radical in many ways, not leasther insistence in bringing the animals into research and analysis as actors. Joiningscholarship to work for structural change, Coppin has been the executive directorof the Santa Cruz Homeless Garden Project and a visiting scholar at UC Berke-ley. In , Arizona voters (percent) overwhelmingly passed the HumaneTreatment of Farm Animals Act, which prohibits the conﬁnement of calves in vealcrates and breeding pigs in gestation crates, both practices that are already bannedthroughout the European Union but are the norm in the United States.For the syllabus for my winter graduate seminar “Animal Studies asScience Studies: We Have Never Been Human,” see http://feministstudies.UCSC.edu/facHaraway.html. See also Jonathan Burt, “Conﬂicts around Slaugh-ter in Modernity,” in Killing Animals,the Animal Studies Group (Urbana:University of Illinois Press, ), –. Then watch Hugh Dorigo’s ﬁlm onfactory farming, Beyond Closed Doors(Sandgrain Films, ).53.Despret, “Sheep Do Have Opinions,” .54.Isabelle Stengers, “The Cosmopolitical Proposal,” in Making ThingsPublic,ed. Latour and Weibel, –, . See also Stengers, Cosmopolitiques,320dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




vols. (Paris: La Découverte, ; originally in vols., Paris: La Découverte,). Stengers’s cosmopolitics is more thoroughly introduced in chapter ,“Sharing Suﬀering.”55.On the prosaic and eﬀects through contingent contiguity, see Gos -linga, “The Ethnography of a South Indian God.”56.For Dixon’s November , , article on the wolf–dog hybrids ofSouth Africa, see www.wolfsongalaska.org/Wolves_south_africa_exile.htm.57.James Bennett, “Hoofbeats and Tank Tracks Share Golan Range,”New York Times,January , , A, A. The light tone of this piece is hard toread in , when war upon war upon war tears and threatens to tear everybodyand everything apart without end, and it is hard even to imagine what cos-mopolitics could look like on this land now. For an unpublished prose poemabout three unarmed Arabs who were killed by the Israeli Army when attempt-ing a cattle raid in , see www.janecollins.org/uploads/The%Golan%Heights.doc.For pictures, see “Raising Beef Cattle in Kfar Yehoshua and theGolan Heights,” http://geosci.uchicago.edu/~gidon/personal/cattle/cattle.html.See www.bibleplaces.com/golanheights.htm for a story of the biblical presenceof cattle on this land; that kind of story shapes today’s claims of belonging.For the Zionist notion on “the people of Israel returning to the Golan” (notthe only position held by Israelis), see www.golan.org.il/civil.html. For hikeson the Golan Heights, see http://galileeguide.com/gguide/etours.html. For asketch of the complex situation on the Golan Heights after the war in Lebanonin , see Scott Wilson, “Golan Heights Land, Lifestyle Lure Settlers: Leba -non War Revives Dispute over Territory,” Washington Post,October , ,A(www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article////AR_pf.html). Annexed in , the Golan Heights supplies about athird of Israel’s water. Wilson reports that in , “the population of roughly,Arabs who remained after the war has grown to about ,. Mostof them refused citizenship. Those who accepted are ostracized to this day in thefour insular mountain towns where the Druze population is concentrated.” (AllWeb sites accessed on May , .)58.When I ﬁrst wrote this paragraph, seven-year-old Willem was livingwith an amputated rear leg from bone cancer, and metastases had recentlyappeared on his lungs. On that day in early November, he was bright-eyed andenergetic, if a little short of breath; and he went on an easy walk with Rusten orme when we ﬁnished work for the day. This chapter is for him and his human,Susan. The contiguities of the prosaic, indeed. Willem died just before Thanks-giving, .NOTES TO CHAPTER 1d321




59.Check out Food Alliance, founded in , as a collaboration amongWashington State University, Oregon State University, and the Washington StateDepartment of Agriculture (www.foodalliance.org/). Explore the “CertiﬁedHumane” labeling project (www.certiﬁedhumane.org), and see “Humane Treat-ment of Farm Animals Can Improve the Quality of the Meat We Eat,” San Fran-cisco Chronicle,September , . Then go to the Community Food SecurityCoalition (www.foodsecurity.org/) for a view of race, class, gender, and—in em -bry onic form—species intersectional analysis and action. Then go to the Ameri -can Livestock Breeds Conservancy (http://albc-usa.org/) and the networks of theNational Campaign for Sustainable Agriculture (www.sustainableagriculture.net/index.php). The California Food and Justice Coalition (www.foodsecurity.org/california/) prominently states in its key principles that “the production,distribution, and preparation of food must be healthy and humane for allhumans, animals and ecosystems.” Brave words, and a lifetime’s work. Not soﬁnally, check out the Intertribal Bison Cooperative, uniting ﬁfty-one Americantribes around the restoration of agriculture and the well-being of Indian land, itsorganisms, and its people (www.intertribalbison.org/). There are also many veganapproaches to food security and justice, for example, track from www.vegan.org/,the Humane Society of the United States, and, of course, People for the EthicalTreatment of Animals. (All Web sites accessed in November .) I end thislist, however, not with my sometimes-allied PETA foe but with vegan colleagues-in-struggle—that is, the antiracist, antisexist, justice-oriented, animal-focusedvegan Carol Adams, Neither Man nor Beast,and her British counterpart, LyndaBirke, Feminism, Animals, and Science(Milton Keynes, U.K.: Open UniversityPress, ).60.John Law and Annemarie Mol, “Complexities: An Introduction,” inComplexities: Social Studies of Knowledge Practices,ed. John Law and AnnemarieMol (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ), . For a beautiful analysis ofthe inadequacy of humanist, personalist models for worldly human–animal en -counters, see Charis Thompson, “When Elephants Stand for Competing Phi -losophies of Nature: Amboseli National Park, Kenya,” in Complexities,–.61.Perhaps here, in an endnote at the close of introductions, is the placeto remember that apparently friendly and curious behavior from wild wolvesdirected at people is most likely to be an exploration of a possible lupine lunchrather than an aﬀectionate cross-species romp. Companion species, cum panis,breaking bread, eating and being eaten, the end of human exceptionalism: this,and not romantic naturalism, is what is at stake in the remembrance. Wild lifeexpert Valerius Geist explained to hunters in the northern U.S. Rockies that as322dNOTES TO CHAPTER 1




wolf population numbers rise well above the levels to which active exterminationreduced them and herbivore populations adjust downward from renewed pred-ator pressure, the competent North American opportunistic canids start actingmore like Russian wolves than like remnants of a vanishing species set down inthe midst of gustatory excess. That is, they start checking out and then stalkingand occasionally attacking humans and their animals. Valerius Geist, “An Impor-tant Warning about ‘Tame’ Wolves,” Conservation Connection(newsletter fromthe Foundation for North American Wild Sheep) (Summer ): –.Thanks to Gary Lease for the article and for many generous conversations abouthunting, dogs, and conservation.2. VALUE-ADDED DOGS AND LIVELY CAPITAL1.Karl Marx, Capital,vol. , trans. Ben Fowkes (New York: VintageBooks, ), .2.Marx came closest in his sometimes lyrical early work, “Theses onFeuerbach” and “The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of ,” in TheMarx–Engels Reader,nd ed., ed. Robert Tucker (New York: Norton, ). Heis both at his most “humanist” and at the edge of something else in these works,in which mindful bodies in inter- and intra-action are everywhere. I followAlexis Shotwell’s subtle analysis of Marx’s near escape from human exceptional-ism implicit in his discussions on how labor power becomes a commodity,sensuousness, aesthetics, and human species being. Alexis Shotwell, “ImplicitUnderstanding and Political Transformation,” PhD dissertation, History ofConsciousness Department, University of California at Santa Cruz, December, –.3.An early interdisciplinary eﬀort to write that missing Marxist volume isSarah Franklin and Margaret Lock, eds., Remaking Life and Death: Toward anAnthropology of the Biosciences(Santa Fe, N.M.: School of American Research,). Then came the following abbreviated but crucial list that I take from mywinter graduate seminar called Bio[X]: Wealth, Power, Materiality, andSociality in the World of Biotechnology: Kaushik Sunder Rajan, Biocapital: TheConstitution of Postgenomic Life(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, );Jerry Mander and Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, eds., Paradigm Wars: Indigenous Peo-ple’s Resistance to Globalization(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor-nia Press, ); Marilyn Strathern, Kinship, Law and the Unexpected: RelativesAre Always a Surprise(New York: Cambridge University Press, ); Cather-ine Waldby and Robert Mitchell, Tissue Economies: Blood, Organs, and Cell LinesNOTES TO CHAPTER 2d323




in Late Capitalism(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ); Achille Mbe-mbe, On the Postcolony(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of CaliforniaPress, ); Franklin, Dolly Mixtures;and Adriana Petryna, Andrew Lakoﬀ,and Arthur Kleinman, eds., Global Pharmaceuticals: Ethics, Markets, Practices(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ). The course grew partly fromthinking about a “ﬁgure” in the sense introduced in chapter , “When SpeciesMeet: Introductions”: Consider a ﬁctional multiple integral equation that is aﬂawed trope and a serious joke in an eﬀort to picture what an “intersectional”theory might look like in Biopolis. Think of this formalism as the mathematicsof sf.Ω∫ Bio [X]n= ∫∫∫∫ . . . ∫∫ Bio (X,X,X,X, . . . ,Xn,t) dXdXdXdX. . . dXndt= BiopolisαX= wealth, X= power, X= sociality, X= materiality, Xn= ??α(alpha) = Aristotle’s & Agamben’s biosΩ (omega) = Zoë (bare life)t= timeBiopolis is an n-dimensional volume, a “niche space,” a private foundation com-mitted to “global is local” biocracy (www.biopolis.org/), and an internationalresearch and development center for biomedical sciences located in Singa-pore (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biopolis). How would one solve such anequation?4.These are American Pet Products Manufacturers Association ﬁguresfrom the free online teaser taken from their –APPMA National PetOwners Survey,available for purchase to non-APPMA members for $. Seewww.appma.org. The APPMA annual Global Pet Expo, the industry’s largesttrade show, is a real eye-opener for any remaining sleeping romantics aboutpet commodity culture. It is open not to the general public but only to retailers,distributors, mass-market buyers, and “other qualiﬁed professionals.” By notshelling out $for the pet owners survey, I lost my chance to get the lowdownon such things as details on where U.S. pet dogs are kept in the day and at night,groomer visits and methods of grooming used, methods used to secure dogs inthe car, types of food and size of kibble purchased, number of treats given, typesof leashes or harnesses used, type of food bowls used, information sources con-sulted and books and videos owned, dog-care items purchased in the last twelve324dNOTES TO CHAPTER 2




months, pet-themed gifts purchased, holiday parties given for dogs, expressedfeeling about beneﬁts and drawbacks of dog ownership, and much more—allduplicated for every common species of pet. Not much in the practice of capitalaccumulation through the lives of companion animals is left to chance.5.“The US Pet Food and Supplies Market,” April , www.MindBranch.com.6.www.appma.org/press_industrytrends.asp (accessed May , ).7.“The World Market for Dog and Cat Food for Retail Sale: A Global Trade Perspective,” ICON Group International, February , www.MindBranch.com. A brief, free, pdf-format summary is available online fromMindBranch, Inc. To learn more, you have to pay. Obtaining my limited com-mercial facts for this chapter cost only my phone number inscribed on an onlineform, followed by an advertising call or two—much more easily resisted than thenew liver cookies at Trader Joe’s. I am indebted to Joe Dumit for thinking aboutthe right (or obligation) to health and food as drugs.8.Mary Battiata, “Whose Life Is It, Anyway?” (Washington Post,August, ) tells us that a four-year vet education in the United States costs abouttwo hundred thousand dollars. Setting up a small vet practice starts at about ﬁvehundred thousand dollars. Battiata cites the study of vet fee structures andlagging salaries by the consulting ﬁrm KPMG.9.See www.pjbpubs.com/cms.asp?pageid=, November , .10.Charis Thompson, Making Parents: The Ontological Choreography ofReproductive Technologies(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, ). See also Har-away, The Companion Species Manifesto.11.See, for example, Ruth La Feria, “Woman’s Best Friend, or Accessory?”New York Times,December , , E, .12.Justin Berton, “Hotels for the Canine Carriage Trade,” San FranciscoChronicle,November , , A, . The marketing in all of the examples dis-cussed was entirely directed to aﬄuent human beings’ ideas/fantasies and paidscant heed to anything like biobehavioral assessments of how dogs and otherboarded species would do best in unfamiliar surroundings. Paying for a “train-ing vacation” might go a long way to increasing civil peace, say, compared withpaying for suites appointed with color-coordinated humanesque furniture andAnimal Planet TV shows.13.Brian Lavery, “For Dogs in New York, a Glossy Look at Life,” NewYork Times,August , .14.Margaret E. Derry, Bred for Perfection: Shorthorn Cattle, Collies, andArabian Horses since (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, ).NOTES TO CHAPTER 2d325




15.For their place in complex nationalisms and ethnic identity discourses,consider the Karelian bear dog, the Suomen-pystyykorva (Finnish spitz dog), theNorsk elghund grå (Norwegian elkhound), the Kelef K’naani (Israeli Canaandog), the Australian dingo (an Eora Aboriginal word), the Islandsk farehond(Iceland sheepdog), the Korean Jindo dog, and the Japanese Shiba inu, Hokkaidoinu, Shikoku inu, Kai inu, and Kishu inu—and I have hardly started. Compar-ing the fascinating histories, discourses, and naturalcultural politics in whichCanaan dogs and dingoes ﬁgure would require another book. Both kinds ofdogs scavenge and hunt in the so-called pariah or primitive dog categories, madeover for globalized breed club standardization. Reconstituted or reinvented dogsof the hunting elites of European feudalism also are a fascinating contemporarystory. Check out the Irish wolfhound in this regard, complete with the breed’s ﬁrst-century b.c.e. Celtic origin story, along with the details of the dog’s nineteenth-century “recovery” enabled by the Scottish captain George Augustus Graham’sbreeding of dogs called Irish wolfhounds, who still remained in Ireland withBorzoi, Scottish deerhounds, and Great Danes. The popularly recited details ofthe Great Rescuer’s craft seem never to pollute the pure-origin story of ancientnobility or disturb the keepers of the closed stud books in the breed clubs. Value-addedseems the right term for these breeding operations!Probably the most important collection in the world of Southwest Indianart, including weaving, pottery, Kachina ﬁgures, and much else, is housed at theSchool of American Research in Santa Fe, New Mexico, in exquisite adobebuildings commissioned by two transplanted, wealthy, eccentric, New Yorkwomen, Elizabeth and Martha Root White. The sisters also raised many of themost famous Irish wolfhounds of that breed’s early period in the United States,between the s and World War II, on this rugged and beautiful property. Theland and buildings now serve as a major anthropological research and conferencecenter. Rathmullan Kennel’s Irish wolfhounds are buried in a little graveyard onthe grounds, marking the value-added encounter of wealth, gender, aestheticizedand reinvented tradition in dogs and human beings, white people’s collection ofindigenous artifacts on a grand scale, philanthropy, activism in support of PuebloIndian land rights and health, patronage of the arts of Europe, the United States,and Indian nations, as well as scholarship of a kind that reaches across genera-tions, nurturing some of the best twentieth- and twenty-ﬁrst-century anthropol -ogy in all subﬁelds. When I visited the dogs’ graves at the School of AmericanResearch in after writing the ﬁrst versions of “Cloning Mutts, SavingTigers” for Sarah Franklin and Margaret Lock’s workshop “New Ways of Liv-ing and Dying,” the bones of the Whites’ Irish wolfhounds seemed like ﬂeshly,326dNOTES TO CHAPTER 2




fantasy-laden, Euro-American ancestors in this complex colonial and nationaltangle. See Gregor Stark and E. Catherine Rayne, El Delirio: The Santa Fe Worldof Elizabeth White(Santa Fe, N.M.: School of American Research, ). Forphotographs of people, grounds, and dogs (including a re-creation by the Whitesisters of a sixteenth-century hunting party with Irish wolfhounds for a Santa Fefestival) and for a detailed description of the myriad practices that sustainedthese upper-class show dogs, see Arthur F. Jones, “Erin’s Famous Hounds Find-ing Greater Glory at Rathmullan,” American Kennel Gazette, no. (), onlineat www.irishwolfhounds.org/jones.htm.16.Franklin, Dolly Mixtures.17.Donna Haraway, “Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers: Ethical Emergents inTechnocultural Dog Worlds,” in Remaking Life and Death: Towards an Anthro-pology of the Biosciences,ed. Sarah Franklin and Margaret Lock (Santa Fe, N.M.:School of American Research Press, ), –; also discussed in chapter, “Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers,” in this volume. Genetic Savings and Clone,Inc., the private corporate labs in which the never-successful Missyplicity Proj-ect came to rest after the researchers at Texas A&M lost heart, went out ofbusiness in October , leaving its frozen companion-animal tissue bank tothe livestock-cloning ﬁrm ViaGen. Genetic Savings and Clone did announce thelive birth of two cloned cats in and mounted its Nine Lives Extravaganza,the world’s ﬁrst commercial cloning service for cats, with an advertised price oftwenty-three thousand dollars plus sales tax in February . CopyCat, one ofthe kittens, cost ﬁfty thousand dollars. No sequel called Cheaper by theDozen followed. The president of the Humane Society of the United Statescould only have been called ecstatic at hearing of Genetic Savings and Clone’sdeparture; he was quoted by Reuters news service on October , , callingthe business failure a welcome “spectacular ﬂop” in light of the resources neededfor addressing pet overpopulation. Truth be told, that is my reaction too. I justread my newspaper’s monthly list of shelter dogs and cats needing homes in mysmall town.18.Hwang W.-S. et al., “Dogs Cloned from Adult Somatic Cells,” Nature, no. (August , ): . Somatic cell nuclear transfer—the Dollytechnique—was the technology employed. In view of the faked data on humanembryonic stem cell (hESC) clones, Snuppy’s authenticity was doubted, but hewas pronounced a deﬁnite clone of Tel, the DNA donor, and a major advance forstem cell research by independent investigators in January . See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snuppy to get started on this story. Over a thousand dogembryos were transferred into diﬀerent bitches to produce three pregnanciesNOTES TO CHAPTER 2d327




and one living dog. The special diﬃculties involved in cloning dogs comparedwith other animals are detailed in Gina Kolata, “Beating Hurdles, ScientistsClone a Dog for a First,” New York Times,August , . On the hESC con-troversy, Hwang still has supporters in South Korea, and many scientists else-where acknowledge the extraordinary international competitive pressures at playin the whole ﬁeld.19.From McCaig’s posting on CANGEN-L, the Canine Genetics Dis-cussion Group Listserv, around . To understand the work of border colliesand the way they are regarded by their people, see Donald McCaig: Nop’s Trials(Guilford, Conn.: Lyons Press, ; orig. ); Nop’s Hope(Guilford, Conn.:Lyons Press, ); Eminent Dogs, Dangerous Men(Guilford, Conn.: LyonsPress, ).20.Edmund Russell, “The Garden in the Machine: Toward an Evolution-ary History of Technology,” in Industrializing Organisms: Introducing Evolution-ary History,ed. Susan R. Schrepfer and Philip Scranton (New York: Routledge,), –.21.Ibid., .22.Track the show through www.dogswithjobs.com/.23.For the history of dogs as subjects for behavioral genetics research, seeScott and Fuller, Genetics and the Social Behavior of the Dog;Paul, “The Rocke-feller Foundation and the Origin of Behavior Genetics”; Haraway, “For the Loveof a Good Dog: Webs of Action in the World of Dog Genetics.” The early hopesfor the ﬁrst U.S. Canine Genome Project, which was led by Jasper Rine andElaine Ostrander, included connecting dog genes and behaviors, using crosses ofpurebred dogs identiﬁed for diﬀerent behavioral specializations, such as New-foundlands and border collies. Some of the talented fruits of those odd crossesplay agility at the same trials that Cayenne and I frequent. The ideas aboutbehavioral genetics in some of the early pronouncements of the Canine GenomeProject were the butt of joking among dog people and also other biologistsfor simplistic formulations of what diﬀerent kinds of dogs do and how “genes”might “code for” “behaviors,” formulations that are rarer in postgenomic dis-course. Check out “Finding the Genes That Determine Canine Behavior,” www.bordercollie.org/kgenome.html (accessed May , ), for an explanation todog people of what the Canine Genome Project was about. Research into behav-ioral genetics is not necessarily simplistic or unimportant for people or otherspecies. However, old-fashioned ideology dressed up as research plays a big rolein the history—and probably future—of this ﬁeld. Ostrander mainly concentratedon comparative cancer genomics in dogs and humans at the Fred Hutchinson328dNOTES TO CHAPTER 2




Cancer Research Center, in Seattle. In , the National Human GenomeResearch Institute (NHGRI) named her as the new chief of its Cancer Genet-ics Branch, one of the seven research branches in the Division of IntramuralResearch. Related to psychopharmacogenetics, comparative behavioral geneticsremains a long-term research commitment in the NHGRI.24.Kerstin Lindblad-Toh et al., “Genome Sequence, Comparative Analy-sis, and Haplotype Structure of the Domestic Dog,” Nature(): –.Elaine Ostrander was one of many prominent (and not so prominent) coauthorson this paper. Several international labs also had canine genetic mapping proj-ects of various kinds dating from the s.25.Stephen Pemberton, “Canine Technologies, Model Patients: The His-torical Production of Hemophiliac Dogs in American Biomedicine,” in Industri-alizing Organisms,ed. Schrepfer and Scranton, –.26.Ibid., .27.Peter Kramer, Listening to Prozac(New York: Penquin, ).28.See Andrew Pollack, “In Trials for New Cancer Drugs, Family PetsAre Beneﬁting, Too,” New York Times,November , .29.This awful story can be tracked from the Southern Poverty Law Cen-ter, Intelligence Report in , “Aryan Brotherhood: Woman’s Death ExposesSeamy Prison Scam,” www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?aid=(accessed May , ). In the year of the mauling death of Diane Whipple bytwo large mastiﬀ-type dogs in a San Francisco apartment building, the incidenceand severity of dog bites in San Francisco in all public places were signiﬁcantlylower as a result of eﬀective public education programs. That did not stop thepublic demand to remove dogs from public areas or greatly restrict their freedomin the wake of the mauling. About twenty dog-bite related human deaths occurin the United States per year in a dog population of over seventy million. Thosestatistics do not justify any of the deaths, but they do give a sense of the size ofthe problem. See Janie Bradley, “Dog Bites: Problems and Solutions,” Animalsand Society Institute, Baltimore, Md., November . This policy paper isavailable through the Society and Animals Forum, http://plus.safe-order.net/psyeta/catalogue/product_info.php?products_id=(accessed May , ).30.For the series, see www.imdb.com/title/tt/.31.See also Andrea Neal, “Trained Dogs Transforming Lives: A ServiceProgram to Beneﬁt People with Disabilities Is Also Helping U.S. Prison In -mates Develop a Purpose for Their Lives,” Saturday Evening Post,, no. (Sep -tember , ). Go to www.pathwaystohope.org/prison.htm for the PrisonDog Project (accessed May , ). Canine Support Teams is the project at theNOTES TO CHAPTER 2d329




California Institute for Women. The Pocahontas Correctional Unit in Chester-ﬁeld, Virginia, is a women’s facility that trains inmates in dog grooming. Genderassumptions seem well groomed here. The Second Chance Prison Canine Pro-gram in Tucson, Arizona, is “a group of advocates for people with disabilities,prison inmates, and animal welfare in Arizona [who] coordinate a prison petpartnership program to address issues common to these three groups” (www.secondchanceprisoncanine.org/, accessed May , ). Go to www.coyotecommunications.com/dogs/prisondogs.html (accessed May , ) for a par-tial list of active prison dog-training programs, which include institutions withprojects for training stray dogs and cats as well as dogs for people with disabili-ties. See T. Harbolt and T. H. Ward, “Teaming Incarcerated Youth with ShelterDogs for a Second Chance,” Society and Animals, no. (): –. Canadaand Australia also have programs. Animal Planet TV shows analyzed in thischapter were ﬁrst aired in .32.Thompson, Making Parents,ﬁgure ..33.For example, besides the texts already cited in note , see Cori Hay-den, When Nature Goes Public: The Making and Unmaking of Bioprospecting inMexico(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, ); Stefan Helmreich,“Trees and Seas of Information: Alien Kinship and the Biopolitics of GeneTransfer in Marine Biology and Biotechnology,” American Ethnologist, no. (): –; Kimberly TallBear, “Native American DNA,” PhD dissertation,University of California at Santa Cruz, December ; Eric Hirsch and Mari-lyn Strathern, eds., Transactions and Creations: Property Debates and the Stimulusof Melanesia(Oxford, U.K.: Berghahn, ). I use the idiomatic term crittertomean a motley crowd of lively beings including microbes, fungi, humans, plants,animals, cyborgs, and aliens. Critters are always relationally entangled rather thantaxonomically neat. I pray that all residual tones of creationhave been silenced inthe demotic critter.It would not do for entangled “turtles all the way down” to beburdened with origin and telos in a father god.3. SHARING SUFFERING1.Nancy Farmer, A Girl Named Disaster(New York: Orchard Books,), . Rejecting medical treatment of any kind for themselves, the Vapos-toris adhere to an independent African Christian church founded in byJohane Maranke. In , besides other mammals, about three hundred thou-sand to ﬁve hundred thousand people in sub-Saharan Africa are infected withsleeping sickness, and about forty thousand human beings die every year. The330dNOTES TO CHAPTER 3




current epidemic dates from , after screening and surveillance eﬀective againstprevious outbreaks were relaxed. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sleeping_sickness.2.See Rebecca M. Herzig, Suﬀering for Science: Reason and Sacriﬁce inModern America(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, ).3.The classic exposition is C. B. Macpherson, The Political Theory of Pos-sessive Individualism(London: Oxford University Press, ).4.Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and theEntanglement of Matter and Meaning(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,), has, over many years and in several publications, crafted the powerfulfeminist theory of intra-action and agential realism. She and I are in ﬁrm soli-darity that this theory richly applies to animals entangled in relations of scien-tiﬁc practice.5.My thinking about what sharing suﬀering might mean was workedout partly in an extended e-mail dialogue in July with Thom van Dooren,an Australian scholar and writer on the worlds of seeds in technoscientiﬁc agri-culture. On July , , van Dooren wrote: “Some suﬀering appears to beneﬁtonly very speciﬁc groups in very superﬁcial ways. Seeing how this all happensrequires that we inhabit the kinds of shared spaces that you’re talking about.But this is all ‘epistemological sharing,’ and I have no idea how we might share ina more concrete, messy, and I think meaningful, way. This is also important, Ithink, in getting at what’s going on in global human relationships in which weare all very deﬁnitely implicated in the suﬀering of countless humans (e.g., in theway in which our lifestyles are made possible by theirs), and also in factory farm-ing. These ‘critters’ (to borrow another of your terms) all suﬀer for us too—inone way or another. How might we actually inhabit a shared space of suﬀeringwith them, and to what end? Especially, when so much of this suﬀering seemscompletely unjustiﬁed and preventable. In short, I’m not sure that I really do getit. . . . I’m not sure what solidarity and sharing amount to unless I’m willing totake their place. Which prompts a whole lot of questions about why I can’tswitch places with them, why, for example, some creatures (even some humans)are ‘allowed’ to suﬀer and others are not.”6.See Schrepfer and Scranton, eds., Industrializing Organisms.KarenRader, Making Mice: Standardizing Animals for American Biomedical Research,–(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, ), is indispensablefor understanding how economic, scientiﬁc, cultural, and institutional mean-ings of naturaland man-madeare negotiated in shaping keystone experimentalorganisms.NOTES TO CHAPTER 3d331




7.In the s and ’s, Marxist feminists faced a partly analogous taskin foregrounding what diﬀerently situated women do that could not count aslabor in classical Marxist analysis, in which the ﬁgure of the male worker andhis family recalls the structural relation of human beings and their animals. Thequestion was transﬁgured fundamentally in Nancy Hartsock, “The FeministStandpoint: Developing the Ground for a Speciﬁcally Feminist Historical Mate-rialism,” in Discovering Reality,ed. Sandra Harding and Merill Hintikka (Dor-drecht, The Netherlands: Reidel, ), –. Taking the sensuous labor ofdiﬀerently situated animals seriously might come more easily to feminists nowbecause of this history.8.Val Plumwood, Feminism and the Mastery of Nature(London: Rout-ledge, ); Greta Gaard, ed., Ecofeminism: Women, Animals, Nature(Philadel-phia: Temple University Press, ). Feminists have also argued early, often, andwell for caring in all its senses as a core needed practice. For twenty-ﬁrst-centuryyoung feminists’ writing on care, see Maria Puig de la Bellacasa on “thinking withcare” in the context of the European feminist group “Nextgenderation.” Seewww.nextgenderation.net/writings.html and www.nextgenderation.net/belgium/soul/care/html. (Both Web sites accessed May , .) See also chapter , n. ,in this volume.9.Of many examples, consider the sensitive treatment by Eileen Crist ofthe ways that language molds writers’, including scientiﬁc writers’, understandingof and relations with animals. Her work is crucial to seeing how the ascriptionof mindful action only to humans and mindless behavior to animals works.Eileen Crist, Images of Animals: Anthropomorphism and Animal Mind(Philadel-phia: Temple University Press, ). Always attuned to dogs in ﬂesh and print,I think the new book by Alice Kuzniar, Melancholia’s Dog(Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press, ), is extraordinary. Melancholia’s Dogis a risky and im -proper book; that is, Kuzniar gives us an acutely intelligent work, intellectuallyand emotionally, that actually takes seriously what goes on aﬀectively betweendogs and people. Attuned to the sadness of unavowed and repudiated attach-ment across species diﬀerence, Kuzniar addresses us, human beings, who refuseto understand that it is we who must learn to comprehend—or even just tonotice—the depth, diﬃculty, and urgency of canine–human relations, so that wemight learn at last to speak properly about such matters as pet loss and death,shared vulnerability, and resonating empathic shame. Melancholia’s Doglovinglyinhabits works of visual and literary art in order to make palpable the urgentneed to nurture the practice of articulate respect for the complexities of ourattachments across the bounds of species diﬀerence. Drawing on literature,332dNOTES TO CHAPTER 3




philosophy, psychoanalysis, and ﬁlm, Erica Fudge makes us fundamentally re -think what relating with animals is and might be. Erica Fudge, Animal(London:Reaktion Books, ). The entire Reaktion Books series on animals (Dog,Cockroach,Crow,Oyster,Rat,and more), under the editorship of Jonathan Burt,is full of remarkable insights, materials, and analyses.10.Indispensable work includes: Carol Adams and Josephine Donovan,eds., Animals and Women: Feminist Theoretical Explorations(Durham, N.C.:Duke University Press, ); Adams, Neither Man nor Beast;Lynda Birke, Fem-inism, Animals, and Science: The Naming of the Shrew(Buckingham, U.K.: OpenUniversity Press, ); and Mette Bryld and Nina Lykke, Cosmodolphins: Fem-inist Cultural Studies of Technology, Animals, and the Sacred(London: Zed Books,). Adams has paid particular attention to questions of racism and the blocksin the way of needed solidarity for eﬀective antiracist, proanimal, feminist work.See also Linda Hogan, Power(New York: W. W. Norton, ); Ursula LeGuin,Buﬀalo Gals and Other Animal Presences(New York: New American Library,); and Alice Walker, “Am I Blue?” in Living by the Word(New York: Har-court Brace, ).11.As Katie King, fellow lover of Nancy Farmer, wrote me about BabaJoseph, “I am also interested in what it means to be willing to be wicked becauseit matters.” E-mail, July , .12.Baba Joseph is not a leading scientist but an animal caretaker andresearch assistant. His position in the scientiﬁc hierarchy is similar to the mostfrequent one between animals and people in biomedical research labs today.Writing about the aﬀective–cognitive tension between the suﬀering of lab ani-mals and of people living with HIV/AIDS, Eric Stanley reminded me thatlow-waged lab technicians with few degrees of freedom in their work practiceare the humans most often “in the presence of” suﬀering animals in mechanizedindustries of drug testing and other major technoscientiﬁc investigations. Whatmight nonmimetic sharing of suﬀering mean if this chapter were to stress thedivision of scientiﬁc labor aﬀecting animals that is on a scale foreign to the hier-archical, but still face-to-face, scenes in Nancy Farmer’s book? See Eric Stanley,“Aﬀective Remains,” qualifying essay in progress, History of ConsciousnessDepartment, University of California at Santa Cruz. Jennifer Watanabe, his-tory of consciousness graduate student, has also emphasized these matters inseminar papers based on her work as a lab technician in a California primateresearch facility.13.Donna J. Haraway, “FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouse™,” inModest_Witness@Second_Millennium,–, .NOTES TO CHAPTER 3d333




14.Smuts, “Encounters with Animal Minds.”15.Jacques Derrida (with Jean-Luc Nancy), “‘Eating Well,’ or the Calcu-lation of the Subject: An Interview with Jacques Derrida,” in Who Comes afterthe Subject?ed. Eduardo Cadava, Peter Connor, and Jean-Luc Nancy (New York:Routledge, ), –. Sacriﬁceis a common word with many meanings, notall contained in Derrida’s analyses, but his treatment of the logic of sacriﬁce inJewish and Christian lineages, including their secular heirs and siblings in thehistory of philosophy, is important. For critical disappointment in Derrida’seﬀorts in “Eating Well,” see David Wood, “Comment ne pas manger—Decon-struction and Humanism,” in Animal Others: On Ethics, Ontology and AnimalLife,ed. H. Peter Steeves (Albany: State University of New York Press, ),–. For detailed and astute readings and extensions of Derrida’s extraordinarywritings on animal matters in philosophy, see Wolfe, Animal Rites,especially hischapter on the failure of rights discourses, “Old Orders for New: Ecology,Animal Rights, and the Poverty of Humanism,” and his essay on Derrida andLévinas (among others), “In the Shadow of Wittgenstein’s Lion: Language,Ethics, and the Question of the Animal.” For another strongly argued insistenceon the irreducible multiplicity of animals and the historically contingent rela-tionships humans have with animals, see Barbara Herrnstein Smith, “AnimalRelatives, Diﬃcult Relations,” diﬀerences, no. (spring ): –. Unfortu-nately, philosophers like Derrida are unlikely to read, cite, or recognize as phi-losophy the large feminist literatures indicated in my notes, above. I blame thatless on the “philosopheme” of the Animal and more on that of the Man and hiscyclopean-like, incurious citation practices! The feminist work was often bothﬁrst and also less entrammeled in the traps of misrecognizing animals as singu-lar, even if we have been just as caught in the nets of humanism and are in needof the kind of thinking Derrida and Gayatri Spivak do.16.This kind of “open” is elucidated in Agamben’s reading of Heidegger.Agamben is very good at explicating how the “anthropological machine” in phi-losophy works. In my view, bare life (zoë) notwithstanding, he is no help at allfor ﬁguring out how to get to another kind of opening, the kind feminists andothers who never had Heidegger’s starting point for Daseinof profound bore-dom can discern. Giorgio Agamben, The Open: Man and Animal,trans. KevinAttel (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, ), –.17.Derrida, “The Animal That Therefore I Am (More to Follow),” .See also Derrida, “And Say the Animal Responded?”18.Derrida, “The Animal That Therefore I Am (More to Follow),” –. For vivid graphic art on just these matters, see Sue Coe, Pit’s Letter(New334dNOTES TO CHAPTER 3




York: Four Walls Eight Windows, ), and www.graphicwitness.org/coe/coebio.htm (accessed May , ). Coe works within a framework of animalrights and uncompromising critical prohibition against eating or experimentingon animals. Her witness is radical. I ﬁnd her visual work compelling but thepolitical and philosophical formulations much less so. Extended to the critiqueof speciesism, the logic of humanism and rights is everywhere, and the substanceof moral action is denunciation, prohibition, and rescue, such that inside instru-mental relations, animals can only be victims. Still, her images have the forceof William Blake’s and Pieter Breugel’s visions, and I need her ﬂaming eyes toburnish my knowledge of hell—an inferno for which my world, includingmyself, is responsible.19.The statistics for animals killed worldwide by people for use in almostevery aspect of human lives are truly staggering (easily obtainable—check theInternet), and the growth of that killing in the last century is, literally, unthink-able, if not uncountable. The staggering growth of the human population in thatsame period is part of the reason but not a suﬃcient explanation for the scaleof animal killing. The advertisements for an important new book state simplythat killing is the most common form of human interaction with animals. Seethe Animal Studies Group, Killing Animals(Urbana: University of Illinois Press,). Anyone watching the destruction of chickens and other birds to fend oﬀthe threat of bird ﬂu’s spreading to people can have no doubt about such claims.Not to take all this killing seriously is not to be a serious person in the world.Howto take it seriously is far from obvious.20.That Jesus was a sacriﬁce is intrinsic to the holy scandal of the GoodNews. Unlike the ﬁrst Isaac, for whom an animal substitute was provided in thenick of time, the Son of Man brought about his own sacriﬁce, and it was sweetto his Father. The nice thing about Christians who take this Story seriously isthat they understand that, all of a sudden, Man is subject to a killing that is notmurder. Jesus is a scapegoat to beat all other surrogates, and this meal has beena feast for a couple thousand years already. This is indeed big trouble for the law.No wonder secularism never satisﬁes the consumers of this category-breakingand endlessly repeated sacriﬁce. My feminist pagan soul coupled with my multi-species work ethic thinks we can do better than either the ﬂeshly Son of Man orhis more ethereal secular siblings.21.Derrida, “The Animal That Therefore I Am (More to Follow),” .22.Ibid., .23.J. M. Coetzee, Disgrace(New York: Viking, ); J. M. Coetzee, TheLives of Animals(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, ). BarbaraNOTES TO CHAPTER 3d335




Smuts made a similar complaint against the absence of real critters in The Livesof Animals.See Barbara Smuts, “Reﬂections,” in The Lives of Animals,–.Cary Wolfe writes about David Lurie and Elizabeth Costello in “Exposures,”Introduction to Philosophy and Animal Life(New York: Columbia UniversityPress, forthcoming). The ﬁctional character Elizabeth Costello has a much morecomplex relation with the adequacy of the discourse of rights and reason in J. M.Coetzee, Elizabeth Costello(New York: Viking, ), when she faces language’sbreakdown of the kind that reaches inside and rearranges one’s innards. None -theless, the Tanner Lectures represent a common, powerful, and in my viewpowerfully wrong approach to the knots of animal and human killing and killa-bility. It is not that the Nazi killings of the Jews and others and mass animalslaughter in the meat industry have no relation; it is that analogy culminating inequation can blunt our alertness to irreducible diﬀerence and multiplicity andtheir demands. Diﬀerent atrocities deserve their own languages, even if there areno words for what we do.24.Pemberton, “Canine Technologies, Model Patients.”25.Haraway, Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium,–.26.Stengers, “The Cosmopolitical Proposal.” See also her two-volumeCosmopolitiques.Stengers is in long and rich conversation with Bruno Latour oncosmopolitics. See Latour, Politics of Nature.27.Training animals of a huge range of species, from octopuses to goril-las, to cooperate actively with people in scientiﬁc protocols and husbandry, aswell as training human caregivers to provide innovative behavioral enrichmentfor the animals in their charge, is a growing practice. Trained animals are subjectto less coercion of either physical or pharmaceutical kinds. Such animals arecalmer, more interested in things, more capable of trying something new in theirlives, more responsive. Previous scientiﬁc research, as well as a bit of ﬁnally lis-tening to people who work well with animals in entertainment and sport, hasproduced new knowledge that in turn changes moral possibilities and obliga-tions in instrumental relationships such as those in experimental animal labora-tories. Experimental animal science, in this case behaviorist and comparativepsychology, has produced knowledge crucial to changing the conditions of workfor people and animals in experimental animal science. To respond also meansto learn to know more; to learn to learn is not something that just the animalsin operant conditioning do. Learning to learn takes ﬁguring out how to cohabita multispecies world shaped by cascades of earned trust. Training involves anasymmetrical relationship between responsive partners. Getting each other’sattention is the core of the relationship. The Animal Behavioral Management336dNOTES TO CHAPTER 3




Alliance, founded in , is the professional association focused solely on train-ing animals, mostly so-called exotics living in human-structured worlds, to im -prove the lives of the critters. A good journalistic account of how people learn toimprove the lives of mostly “nondomestic” animals who work in a variety of jobs,in everything from zoo display, TV and ﬁlm, to research labs, is Amy Sutherland,Kicked, Bitten, and Scratched: Life and Lessons at the World’s Premier School forExotic Animal Trainers(New York: Viking, ).Experimental lab scientists get the point eventually. On September ,, an article by Andy Coghlan titled “Animal Welfare: See Things from TheirPerspective,” New Scientist(September ): –, reported on a confer-ence at the Royal Society in London focusing on the ways animals interpret theworld, including the implications for treatment of animals working in scientiﬁcresearch. Coghlan writes that “the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research iscarrying out the country’s [the United Kingdom’s] ﬁrst in-depth investigationinto stress and distress in laboratory animals.” The goal is to develop a set ofobjective measures of distress and well-being for various species, so that care canbe more appropriate and uncoupled from common narratives and assumptionsunchecked by data. The Royal Society was the scene of Robert Boyle’s reportson the gas laws in seventeenth-century England; maybe we can expect a similarrevolutionizing impact from the reports. How does one know if a dog ora mouse is in pain? An objective answer to that sort of question can actually befound if one (a) is curious and (b) also cares. Ordinary, fallible instruments suchas psychometric assessments in the context of comparative medicine are handytwenty-ﬁrst-century air pumps, bypassing the theologies of debates about ani-mal sentience and confronting the evacuation of the heart and mind in currentanimal industrial practices in science and elsewhere. For a good example of thestill ﬂawed but nonetheless better attention to canine experimental subjects’well-being, see Robert Hubrecht, “Comfortable Quarters for Dogs in ResearchInstitutions,” University Federation for Animal Welfare, U.K., www.awionline.org/pubs/cq/ca-dogs.html (accessed May , ). For an exposé of atleast some actual conditions for research dogs, those unlucky enough to be in thejaws of the Beagle Unit at Huntington Life Sciences in the United Kingdom, atleast between and , see “Inside HLS,” www.shac.net/MISC/Inside_HLS_Full_Report.html (accessed May , ). The footage from this exposéaired on Britain’s channel in , sparking a major antivivisection campaign.Hubrecht works hard to eliminate practices like those at HLS. He won the GlaxoSmithKline Laboratory Animal Welfare Prize. If only my skepticismabout the mercies of big pharma could be put to rest . . . But the extent andNOTES TO CHAPTER 3d337




power of Hubrecht’s and others’ raising standards of care are real and important.For a medical research organization (RDS) approach to animals in experimen-tal practice, see www.rds-online.org.uk/ (accessed May , ). RDS reportsthat there were about three million scientiﬁc procedures using animals in theUnited Kingdom in .28.Despret, “The Body We Care For.”29.Hélène Cixous, “Stigmata, or Job the Dog,” in Stigmata, Escaping Texts(New York: Routledge, ), –. I am grateful to Adam Reed for giving meCixous’s essay and for his evident pain and care in reading it.30.Indiana University literary scholar, writer, and lawyer for animal well-being Alyce Miller organized the Kindred Spirits conference (in Bloomington,Indiana, September –, ) to bring diverse scholars, artists, and activiststogether outside the setup of animal rights versus animal welfare. The excellentpresentations, as well as thoughtful and principled presence of the participants,continue to work on my mind and heart. See www.indiana.edu/~kspirits/index.htm.31.E-mail from Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi to Donna Haraway, July ,.32.Susan Harding, “Get Religion,” in ms., .33.Thompson, Making Parents.34.A rough measure of this increased use of rodents is the importance ofmice carrying knockout genes. Comparative genomics is the name of the game.Several nations have large new projects to produce tens of thousands of knock-outs, that is, mice strains with disabled genes. For example, the U.S. NationalInstitutes of Health announced the Knockout Mouse Project to make ten thou-sand new mutants; Europe and Canada are after another thirty thousand. Chinaaims to produce one hundred thousand diﬀerent mutants in twenty thousandlines of mice, each with a diﬀerent knockout gene. Sciencemagazine estimates thesize of the international eﬀort to be the largest since the Human Genome Proj-ect. The goal is to have knockouts for every mouse gene and make them availablepublicly. Mass-produced mutant mice are the machine tools for the comparativestudy of gene function. Cataloging, distribution, and intellectual property areonly some of the matters being fully aired. See David Grimm, “A Mouse forEvery Gene,” Science(June , ): –. Mouse well-being warrantsno mention. How could it, when their status as animals is lost in rhetoric like thefollowing? “As a group, the knockout projects are trying to create something akinto the international superstore IKEA, where in a single trip, customers can buya houseful of easy-to-assemble furniture at reasonable prices. . . . Some assembly338dNOTES TO CHAPTER 3




would be required: turning those frozen embryos into live mice. . . . Such aresource would be a far cry from today’s mouse trade, which is more like buyingfurniture from neighbors” (). I do not oppose carefully considered invasiveresearch with mice. My question is not that but how to engage in such practicesface-to-face, inside the mortal knot of becoming with other animals. I ﬁnd it col-lectively psychotic, and highly functional, to deal in rhetorical and other researchpractices as if the mice were only tools or products and not also sentient fellowcritters. The both/and is very hard to hold on to. Losing a grip on the both/andmeans toppling into the unbridgeable chasm between self-satisﬁed instrumentalrationality, on the one hand, and perhaps equally self-satisﬁed right-to-life dis-course, on the other hand. The problem for companion species, I argue, is nothow to be satisﬁed but how to handle indigestion. The same issue of Science,acouple pages before the story on knockout mice, carried an animal-behavior itemtitled “Signs of Empathy in Mice” (). The question might better be whethervery many people show such signs in their dealings with mice. Perhaps humangenes to support such capacities were knocked out by alien cat researchers in anearlier era. See also Lynda Birke, “Who—or What—Is the Laboratory Rat (andMouse)?” Society and Animals, no. (): –.35.Pearse is a researcher at the Institute of Marine Sciences, University ofCalifornia at Santa Cruz, editor of the renowned journal Invertebrate Biology,and coauthor of the classic text Animals without Backbones: An Introduction to theInvertebrates,by Ralph Buchsbaum, Mildred Buchsbaum, John Pearse, and VickiPearse, rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ). See www.iode.org/oceanexpert/viewMemberRecord.php?&memberID=(accessed May, ). Pearse generously helps History of Consciousness science studiesgrad students with the marine zoology aspects of their dissertations. See EvaShawn Hayward, “Envisioning Invertebrates: Immersion, Inhabitation, and Inti-macy as Modes of Encounter in Marine TechnoArt,” qualifying essay, Historyof Consciousness Department, University of California at Santa Cruz, Decem-ber .36.Michael Hadﬁeld, e-mail to Donna Haraway, August , . On thesnail research see, M. G. Hadﬁeld, B. S. Holland, and K. J. Olival, “Contributionsof ex situPropagation and Molecular Genetics to Conservation of HawaiianTree Snails,” in Experimental Approaches to Conservation Biology,ed. M. Gordonand S. Bartol (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, ).See also www.kewalo.hawaii.edu/labs/hadﬁeld/ and www.hawaii.edu/eecb/FacultyPgs/michaelhadﬁeld.html (both Web sites accessed May , ).37.Scott Gilbert, e-mail to Donna Haraway, August , .NOTES TO CHAPTER 3d339




38.Isabelle Stengers, Penser avec Whitehead(Paris: Gallimard, ).See www.ensmp.fr/~latour/articles/article/-stengers.html (accessed May, ) for Bruno Latour’s review of Penser.Alfred North Whitehead: Scienceand the Modern World;Process and Reality,corrected ed. (New York: Free Press,); Modes of Thought(New York: Macmillan, ).4. EXAMINED LIVES1.The joke is perhaps too precious, but paraphilias, or sidewindingloves, are just about every kind of libidinally invested connection known to psy-choanalysis and sexology since Havelock Ellis, and I would be disappointed ifdog love were not in there somewhere. A matter of interest for feminists, episte-mophilia, or the love of knowledge, is all about scooping and scoping out themother’s body in the subject’s perverse lust to know its origins. Nothing inno-cent in that! Curiosity is right in there with other sorts of digging in mud andscoping out—spelunking, really—in tubes and caves. Curiosity is not a nice vir -tue, but it does have the power to defeat one’s favorite self-certainties.2.For a long-range view of the emergence of working dogs of all kinds,see Raymond Coppinger and Richard Schneider, “Evolution of Working Dogs,”in The Domestic Dog: Its Evolution, Behaviour, and Interactions with People,ed.James Serpell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), –. For theemergence of working animals broadly, see Juliet Clutton-Brock, A Natural His-tory of Domesticated Mammals(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).For a study of the strength and antiquity of human–dog aﬀectional and socialbonds suggested by the worldwide distribution of ancient dog burial sites, tiesthat the author sees as deﬁning dogs as a species, see Darcy F. Morey, “Bury-ing Key Evidence: The Social Bond between Dogs and People,” Journal ofArchaeological Science(): –. On Native working, pet, food, andother dogs in the Americas before the arrival of European canine kinds, see Mar-ion Schwartz, A History of Dogs in the Early Americas(New Haven, Conn.: YaleUniversity Press, ). On the importance of animals in imperial settler colo -nies, see Virginia Anderson, Creatures of Empire(New York: Oxford UniversityPress, ).3.Linda Rorem, “Australian Shepherd History,” www.glassportal.com/herding/shepherd.htm (accessed May , ). The recently reissued classic onthe ten-thousand-year interaction of sheep and human beings is M. L. Ryder,Sheep and Man(London: Duckworth, ). Ryder published extensively fromhis base in the Agricultural Research Council’s Animal Breeding Research340dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




Organization in Edinburgh. Sarah Franklin, my friend and colleague who herdsme mercilessly into sheep–human–dog naturalcultural ecologies, gives a goldmine of information in Dolly Mixtures.4.Molecular genetic studies do not show the mitochondrial- or nuclear-DNA segments in living U.S. dogs that would be expected from the oﬀspring ofpreconquest dogs, who seem to have been massively killed oﬀor to have died oﬀor both with the arrival of European dogs and their ﬁerce people and destructivedomestic food animals. I do not know if Navajo dogs have been speciﬁcallyexamined with this question in mind. But see Mark Derr, Dog’s Best Friend(NewYork: Holt, ), , –, for the opinion that some Navajo dogs closelyresemble speciﬁc sorts of preconquest American dogs and for a discussion oftheir ﬂock-guarding behavior under Navajo systems of pastoralism.5.From “The Navajo Sheep Project,” www.recursos.org/sheepislife/dine.html. See also www.ansi.okstate.edu/breeds/sheep/navajochurro/index.htmand www.navajo-churrosheep.com/. (Web sites accessed on May , .) Fora good introduction to the history of Navajo textiles, see Eulalie H. Bonar,ed., Woven by the Grandmothers: Nineteenth-Century Navajo Textiles from theNational Museum of the American Indian(Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian In-stitution Press, ). For astute, engaged, and moving arguments for neededcountermodernities in Australian worlds and elsewhere, see Deborah Bird Rose,Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics for Decolonisation(Sydney: University ofNew South Wales Press, ).6.From “Sheep Is Life,” www.recursos.org/sheepislife/dine.html (accessedMay , ).7.I adopt the locution “more-than-human” from Australian anthropolo-gist, philosopher, and science studies scholar Thom van Dooren, in his PhDdissertation, “Seeding Property: Nature, Human/Plant Relations and the Pro-duction of Wealth,” Australian National University, .8.Diﬀerent breeds of meat and ﬁber sheep in international trade havelong been important in the history of capital, and Australia is a key player. Neverpretty for the sheep, the trade has only become more brutal with factory farm-ing and has technoscientiﬁcally enabled reduction of animals to little more thanbioproducers of money. Only one example is the many millions of live sheepshipped annually by countries such as Australia and Uruguay to the Middle Eastand Asia for Ramadan; the death rate of these sheep in transit has become aninternational scandal. For a global trade advertisement, see www.alibaba.com/catalog//Sheep_For_Ramadan.html (accessed May , ). U.K.-export sheep go mainly to northern Europe, especially France. For a view fromNOTES TO CHAPTER 4d341




ovine hell, see Sue Coe and Judith Brody, Sheep of Fools(Seattle, Wash.: Fanta-graphics Books, ).9.Franklin, Animal Nation,, notes that the immigrant dingo, with itsfour-thousand-year history on the island continent, is held responsible not onlyfor the extermination of the Australian marsupial thylacines on mainland Aus-tralia but also more recently for depredations on the white settler colony’s pas-toral economy, resulting in a ten-thousand-kilometer fence from Queensland toSouth Australia. Franklin tells of the still more recent econationalist rehabilita-tion of the dingo into a symbol of native wild nature in important vacation andtourist sites such as Fraser Island. The American Kennel Club gave dingoes itsimprimatur in , designating them an Australian dog breed. The dingo haseven achieved the mixed grace of becoming oﬃcially endangered as a result of itsunblessed interbreeding with ordinary feral dogs. U.S. wolves have followed asimilar route from vermin and killers, deemed worthy of soul-chillingly eﬀectiveand brutal extermination campaigns and bounty hunters, to members of theecoelite of the super-Native charismatic macrofauna. See Jody Emel, “Are YouMan Enough, Big and Bad Enough? Wolf Eradication in the U.S.,” in AnimalGeographies,ed. Jennifer Wolch and Jody Emel (London: Verso, ), –.Post–Captain Cook extirpation campaigns against dingoes contributed stronglyto the extinction of sixteen other Australian species of mammals by removingtheir top predator, freeing introduced European predators such as foxes to feastunmolested on the southern continent’s ground-dwelling species such as theeastern hare-wallaby. See New Scientist(November , ): . For an extraor-dinary ethnography that centers the importance of dingoes to Aboriginal peopleof the Northern Territory, see Deborah Bird Rose, Dingo Makes Us Human(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).10.Good breed history of the Australian shepherd, complete with greatpictures of the old-style ranch dogs and the modiﬁed ideal “versatile” Aussies ofthe post-s, can be found in two Australian Shepherd Club of America year-books: Twenty Years of Progress: –and Proving Versatility: –.ThatRoland, Rusten’s and my Aussie–chow cross, looks like the old-style herdingAussies goes a long way in explaining why he was given an “Indeﬁnite ListingPrivilege” from the American Kennel Club as an Australian shepherdwhen I sentin his picture. I told what I knew for sure of his ancestry—namely, that hisunregistered, undeniably Aussie dam worked sheep and cattle in California’sCentral Valley—and neglected to mention the chowish coats and purple tonguesof his littermate sisters. Since the whole litter had had their tails mutilatedAussie-style, and he was castrated and so blocked from genetic pollution of more342dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




high-born Aussie lines, our sable-merle Roland had a chance. Sable merle is adisqualifying, but formerly not uncommon, color and coat pattern for kennel-club Aussies in the show ring. Besides, Roland did very well in the AmericanHerding Breeds Association herding-aptitude ﬁeld test, earning a qualifying cer-tiﬁcate as well as a respectful look and encouragement to continue his stocktraining from some serious herding-trial people. I requested AKC breed regis-tration for three reasons: () to run with him in AKC agility, () to buﬀer himfrom “dangerous breed” paranoia about chow chows if he ever gets into trouble,and () to indulge my feelings about the incongruence of institutionally closedgene pools and herding talent. Besides, I am somewhat more positive than I usedto be about the role of kennel clubs in keeping the valuable legacy of kinds ofdogs alive. There are other ways, biologically and socially, to nurture kinds ofdogs into the future, but kennel clubs are generally what we have to work fromin the industrial world now. Besides, many of the people working for dogs inthese clubs utterly dashed my prejudices. I write about Roland’s papers nowbecause this abidingly sweet dog is too old to get into much trouble, even if hewants to. Besides, paternity is never certain, a matter of some historical impor-tance. This is the doubt that fueled wars of succession where human bastardywas at issue, and in today’s technoscientiﬁc times such uncertainty drives kennelclubs to demand the registration of DNA parentage veriﬁcation for litters.Biotech companies in dogland have sprouted up to provide the tests for a nice lit-tle proﬁt. Blood and genes make a heady mixture, as every antiracist feministtheorist knows, whether thinking about human or nonhuman animals.11.Long before positive training methods became popular, Sisler trainedwith hotcakes and praise; he never taught dogs on lead. He and his brotherlooked for, worked with, and bred good working dogs. His and his dogs’ actsbecame famous in the United States and Canada, and his “blue dogs” playedin the Disney movies Run Appaloosa Runand The Best Cow Dog in the West.Sisler died in . For more information, see http://worknaussies.tripod.com/and www.workingaussiesource.com/stockdoglib/scott_sisler_article.htm (Websites accessed May , ). The Sisler Ranch was on the Farm Tour of theIdaho Organic Exchange in ; this cattle ranch practices no-till seeding,rotational grazing, biological weed control, riparian management, and use ofsettling ponds and ﬁlter strips. See Idaho Organic Alliance Newsletter(Winter): .12.See Vicki Hearne, Adam’s Task: Calling Animals by Name(New York:Knopf, ), and her novel, The White German Shepherd(New York: AtlanticMonthly Press, ). To her death, Hearne remained acerbic about “positiveNOTES TO CHAPTER 4d343




training” methods and food treats. In that particular, Hearn would not haveapproved of the hotcake-dispensing Sisler! I think she was both ﬁxed in heropinions, come hell or high water—or evidence—and an educated genius withand about animals and their relations with people. Hearne insisted on dogs’ rightand need to work and to be respected for their judgment and ability and there-fore on their entitlement to an education with real criteria and consequences. Allof that meant that Hearne considered dogs to be sentient, conscious beings withminds that are not human. Her best philosophical work, in my opinion, laysout the grounds in her cross-species practice and that of other dog people forthat view. For working dog-handler arguments in a science studies idiom fordogs’ intentionality and ability to engage in creative, coordinated performanceswith human beings and other dogs (in their case, ﬁeld gun dog work and sheepherding in both trial and farm conditions), see Graham Cox and Tony Ashford,“Riddle Me This: The Craft and Concept of Animal Mind,” Science, Technology,and Human Values, no. (): –. Cox and Ashford correctly empha-size that “domestic” animal behavior and abilities have received much less re -search attention than animal behavior in both “the wild” and “the laboratory”(). It is impossible to take “domestic” animals seriously, especially dogs, giventheir evolutionary history with people, without paying attention to human–ani-mal co-constituted behavior. I am more sympathetic than Hearne or Cox andAshford to the usefulness in many situations of technical training approachesderived from behaviorism as part of the education of dogs and people, but Iagree that without a vivid sense of working with someone,not something,andtherefore a practical commitment to nonhuman embodied cognitive competence,nothing very interesting can happen together, because the human being won’t beprepared to respond. Theorizing and building on cross-species achievements inthe context of tested practice are knowledge-producing activities that ought tobe called what they are—science (Wissenschaft).13.Committed to working stock dogs, herding trial people are fractious,demanding, and proud, for good reason. The subject of a rich oral culture, well-known competitive lines of working Aussies are the result of extensive culling aswell as training. For a fascinating view of quite diﬀerent approaches to the work-ing herders, track the Web sites of Hangin’ Tree Working Australian Shepherds(www.adastrafarm.com/AustralianShepherds/HanginTreeWorkingAustralianShepherds/tabid//Default.aspx), Slash V dogs (http://users.htcomp.net/slashv/home.htm), and Oxford dogs (www.promedia.net/users/oxranch/). Seealso www.stockdog.com/breeders/aussie.htm. (All Web sites accessed May ,.)344dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




That a kennel could continue to use the name “Hangin’ Tree” in with-out comment says something ugly about race and class in Salmon, Idaho, wherethis working Aussie line was developed—and well beyond, right into the bodyof my whole multispecies nation, where, alas, “hangin’ tree” appears throughoutthe pedigree. I assume the various breeders’ proud continuation of the nametoday, and probably its initial use by those who developed the line, carries noconscious connection to rough “justice” in the West for Chinese, white, black, andIndian people or to the lynching of African Americans in the South and else-where. However, hearing the tones of “hangin’ tree” comes with touching mydog and the dogs of my friends seriously. My kin include Hangin’ Tree dogs.Memory—and inheriting its consequences—surges through touch. I hear againBilly Holiday’s recording of “Strange Fruit,” and I see the indelible photo-graphs of scenes of lynching across the United States, even as I fall in love witha beautiful, talented puppy newly coming into my extended kin group in agility.Maybe it is just as well that the formal name ”Hangin’ Tree” remains in the writ-ten pedigrees of thousands of serious working dogs, whose ancestors really werepart of the Anglo conquest of the West. Forgetting is not a route to response.Holiday sang,Here is the fruit for the crows to pluckFor the rain to gather, for the wind to suckFor the sun to rot, for the tree to dropHere is a strange and bitter crop.For a summary and a picture, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strange_Fruit.For crucial analysis, see Angela Davis, Blues Legacy and Black Feminism(NewYork: Vintage, ).The serious working and trialing kennels place their dogs in suburbansports homes (and even pet homes) but with considerable demands about whatthe dogs will do in agility or whatever (often written into the sales contracts) andgreat reservations about where these dogs would belong if only there wereenough real herding jobs. Ad Astra Farm is a good example of a working-herderkennel that also breeds special sheep and ducks for the sport of trialing. Thewell-being of the other partners to the dogs and humans in the sport—thesheep, cattle, and ducks—is not an optional question for serious companionspecies. Is the sport okay for the noncarnivores? The answer should not be auto-matic as a function of one’s preexisting ideology but should be a provocation toresearch and response in the context of changing histories. That approach isessential to my sense of“worldliness.”NOTES TO CHAPTER 4d345




14.Harriet Ritvo, The Animal Estate(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-versity Press, ), is the ﬁrst place to go to understand how the animal-showculture and breeding for show are technologies of human class, nation, and gen-der formation.15.Carol Adams, The Pornography of Meat(New York: Continuum,), makes a compelling case for veganism in the context of a sophisticated,intersectional critique of the connection of the meat industry’s brutality towardanimals and toward people, especially women and even more especially womenof color. “Ordinary” meat eating is not just complicity, in Adam’s view, butboth inexcusable direct violence against animals and participation in the vio-lent oppression of classes of people. To track what becomes food for technocul-tural people and some of the needed response, see Michael Pollan, Omnivore’sDilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals(New York: Penguin, ).16.Stengers, “The Cosmopolitical Proposal,” .17.Thanks to Sharp for two extensive formal interviews, Fresno, Calif.,March , , and November , , and for permission to quote. Since thefall of , Sharp has generously shared her Aussie knowledge and work withme in e-mails, on the CANGEN-L site for discussion of dog population geneticdiversity and depletion, at agility trials to which she came to see Cayenne andme run, over dinners in California’s Central Valley, in comparing notes on thecourse we both took online in dog genetics from the Cornell University vetschool, through her work on the Web site of the Australian Shepherd Healthand Genetics Institute, and through her publications and manuscripts (includ-ing some great love stories sold under a pseudonym to magazines of nondogwomen). I serve as a reader for chapters of Sharp’s book-in-progress on doggenetics and health for breeders. Sharp helped me ﬁnd Cayenne’s breeder whenI wanted a puppy who would likely grow up to enjoy and excel at agility. Such adog would be more likely to come into the world in the stock dog culture thanthe show conformation culture. Many mutts can also become dynamite agilitydogs, but the high-drive herding dogs prevail.Sharp has also been an informal genetic counselor for me and Cayenne,referring us to the merle gene researcher Sheila Schmutz. See http://homepage.usask.ca/~schmutz/merle.html and http://homepage.usask.ca/~schmutz/dogcolors.html (Web sites accessed May , ). As expected (because I knew agreat many of her relatives and had extensive communication with her scrupu-lous, nonsecretive breeders), Cayenne’s cheek swab–derived DNA showed herto be heterozygous, not homozygous, for merle (a coat pigment-distribution pat-tern). Merle is an autosomal dominant gene that has recently been mapped and346dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




characterized at a molecular level. In homozygous form, merle results in a nearlypercent incidence of neural deafness or visual defects or both. In its het-erozygous form, merle is not known to predispose any sensory impairment.Cayenne is unilaterally neurologically deaf, a highly unusual condition for a het-erozygote. Merle is a popular coat pattern in Aussies and several other breeds.Breeding merle to merle produces on average percent homozygotes for M,and so such breedings are widely regarded by Aussie people as unethical.18.C. A. Sharp, “The Biggest Problem,” Double Helix Network News(Summer ): . Before going further, it is important to note that mutts andstreet dogs have genetic diseases too. Indeed, large mixed populations will showthe whole gamut of such conditions at various frequencies. The special issue forpurebreds is that they are a kind of institutionally produced Galápagos Islandsof the dog world, in which populations are cut oﬀfrom out-crossing, and so onlya subset of canine gene-linked disorders is likely to appear in any one breed.However, if lots of inbreeding—including the common practice of line breedingto concentrate the genetic contribution from highly valued dogs—is the norm,over the generations (and it can happen fast), speciﬁc disease-linked genes willoccur much more commonly in the homozygous state. Further, if particular maledogs with highly prized appearance or behavior sire large numbers of puppies(the “popular sire syndrome”), those dogs’ alleles will become more and more fre-quent, with consequences for undesirable traits as well as for the ones sought.Females cannot parent anything like the number of puppies that males poten-tially can, but overuse of a dam also matters. Overall, breed genetic diversity willbe reduced as too few dogs contribute their genes to the next generations, and inaddition to a higher incidence of speciﬁc genetic diseases, reduced vitality fromexcessive homozygosity can take many forms, probably especially immune dys-function. All of this means that a major form of breed health activism concernsboth learning to avoid doubling up on undesirable genes and learning to breedto enhance genetic diversity or at least maintain rather than deplete it. Eachbreed will have diﬀerent diseases of special interest, but the shape of the prob-lem and the response of health activists in technoculture are the same. Activistsin diﬀerent breeds share information and strategy with one another. The linkson the Australian Shepherd Health and Genetics Institute Web site to otherbreeds’ health and genetics groups illustrate this networking (www.ashgi.org/).Much breed genetic activism runs up against deeply held beliefs inherited fromnineteenth-century doctrines of blood and excellence that are built into the face-to-face mentoring practices that reproduce breeders. A vivid account of how theseidioms of pedigree operate in horse-breeding worlds is Rebecca Cassidy, TheNOTES TO CHAPTER 4d347




Sport of Kings: Kinship, Class, and Thoroughbred Breeding in Newmarket(Cam-bridge: Cambridge University Press, ).19.Founded in with a focus on canine hip dysplasia, the OFA main-tains searchable databases on numerous orthopedic and genetic diseases. Partic-ipation is voluntary, and information remains conﬁdential unless the dog’s ownerspeciﬁcally releases it into the public domain. Breed clubs and the AKC couldrequire such participation in order for anyone to register his or her dogs, but thatkind of obligatory standard is not yet acceptable in the United States, whereblack helicopters in the sky are seen to accompany any infringement on individ-ual and commercial interests (unless one is labeled a terrorist, in which case anykind of infringement seems to be okay). See www.oﬀa.org/. Developing opendatabases in which all breeding dogs and their close relatives are included hasbeen a major goal of dog health activists. CHIC, the Canine Health InformationCenter (www.caninehealthinfo.org/), is a centralized database jointly sponsoredby the AKC’s Canine Health Foundation and the OFA. CHIC goals are “) towork with parent clubs in the identiﬁcation of health issues for which a cen-tral information system should be established; ) to establish and maintain acentral health information system in a manner that will support research intocanine disease and provide health information to owners and breeders; ) toestablish scientiﬁcally valid diagnostic criteria for the acceptance of informationinto the database; and ) to base the availability of information on individuallyidentiﬁed dogs at the consent of the owner.” Since each breed has diﬀerent healthconcerns, CHIC works with parent clubs to set up breed-speciﬁc standards forbecoming a CHIC-enrolled breed. For example, for Australian shepherds,required tests are OFA evaluations for hip and elbow dysplasia and Canine EyeRegistry Foundation evaluation for eyes. Optional tests are recommended forcollie eye anomaly, autoimmune thyroiditis, and multiple drug resistance. Thecurrent inability to test for the genetic background of epilepsy is a major issue inthe breed.Establishing the norm of appropriate universal participation isthe elusivekey. Even the best intentioned become confused in the face of ever-increasinglists of testable genetic disorders, and many high-priority screening tests havenot yet been developed; also, multiplying gene tests is no more a panacea forresponsible canine parenthood than it is for human beings setting out to makebabies. Which tests, in which circumstances, and at what cost are the stuﬀoftechnocultural cosmopolitics for researchers as well as for breeders and otherdog people. The commercialization of the genome, especially in diagnostics andas fast as possible in therapeutic vet pharma, is as evident and problematic in348dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




aﬄu ent canine worlds as it is in human ones. Cancer is a hot spot in thesecompanion-species biopolitics. The “gene for X” functions as a powerful fetish.20.Sharp, “The Biggest Problem,” .21.Starting with a genetic eye disease is overdetermined in my companion-species tale. Sharp has a progressive genetic condition that has robbed her of alarge portion of her vision, which stops her precious little from robust partici-pation in online culture and extensive travel and speaking on behalf of caninegenetic-health research and action, but vision loss did put an end to her breed-ing Aussies for show.22.Because the Internet now plays such a dominant role in dog genetichealth communication and education, mail subscriptions in numberedabout one hundred. Many of Sharp’s key articles are on the ASHGI Web site.She has won three coveted awards for her dog health writing: two awards infrom the Dog Writers Association of America for the article “The Price ofPopularity” and for the DHNNitself, and the AKC’s ﬁrst annual Golden PawAward in for “The Rising Storm: What Breeders Need to Know about theImmune System.”23.Quotations not otherwise documented come from my recorded inter-views with Sharp in and .24.C. A. Sharp, “CEA and I,” www.workingdogs.com/doc.htm,linked through the Canine Diversity Project, www.canine-genetics.com/ (Websites accessed May , ).25.For principles of test breeding and CEA pedigree analysis, see DHNN(Summer–Spring ).26.L. F. B. Rubin, Inherited Eye Disease in Purebred Dogs(Baltimore:Williams and Wilkins, ).27.Lionel Rubin, Betty Nelson, and C. A. Sharp, “Collie Eye Anomaly inAustralian Shepherd Dogs,” Progress in Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmol-ogy, no. (): –.28.George A. Padgett, Control of Canine Genetic Diseases(New York:Howell Book House, ), , .29.Bruno Latour, Science in Action(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-sity Press, ); Donna Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Ques-tion in Feminism as a Site of Discourse on the Privilege of Partial Perspective,”Feminist Studies, no. (): –.30.Sharp, “CEA and I.”31.“The CEA ‘support group,’ always informal, does not really exist any-more. Over the years folks have wandered out of the breed or on to other things,NOTES TO CHAPTER 4d349




but it was helpful at the time.” C. A. Sharp, e-mail communication, April ,.32.Paul Rabinow, “Artiﬁciality and Enlightenment: From Sociobiology toBiosociality,” in Incorporations,ed. J. Crary and S. Kwinter (New York: ZoneBooks, ), –.33.With about percent of Aussies aﬀected with CEA, CERF reportsfrom the late s indicate that the gene frequency was fairly steady, with –percent of Aussies being likely carriers. Sharp, e-mail communication, April, .34.See www.optigen.com/opt_about.html (accessed May , ). TheCEA test in cost $, with discounts for litters and for online purchase.In , the online dog magazine published a report (www.dogplace.com/library/Ed_DNA_litmus_test_.htm, accessed May , ) of how a re -searcher at Cornell’s Baker Institute for Animal Health, who was seeking bloodsamples from dogs to investigate the genetic background to cryptorchidism,treated the head of a dog media organization asking for more information aboutthe study before promoting it on its Web site, which the organization anticipateddoing. The scientist’s complete failure to address any of the dog organization’sintelligently phrased (to my eye) questions illustrates an important aspect ofdealing with some scientist–entrepreneurs, a matter that can shape participa-tion—or lack of it—in research. Without telling me names or companies, Sharpdescribed various experiences of being ignored and subjected to overt or uncon-scious disrespect, despite her credentials and history. Even practicing vets withclients’ dogs who might be sampled are ignored by some unnamable scientists,despite their business plans and ambitious biotech companies. This kind of factexplains why dog health activists, in general, and Sharp, in particular, work sohard to build links between bench scientists and ordinary dog people. Sharp alsogave me several accounts of thick cooperation and collaboration between inves-tigators and dog people. Her long-term relation with Sheila Schmutz is one suchexample. On her Web site (http://homepage.usask.ca/~schmutz/merle.html,accessed May , ), Schmutz credits Sharp for helping her obtain samples forher research, and in the DHNNSharp explains and promotes Schmutz’s re -search among Aussie people. See also S. Schmutz, T. G. Berryere, and C. A.Sharp, “KITLG Mapping to CFAand Exclusion as a Candidate Gene forMerle,” Animal Genetics, no. (February ): –. In Keith Mur-phy’s group at Texas A&M reported that a retrotransposon insertion in a genecalled SILV is responsible for the merle pattern.35.Sharp is frequently invited to give genetics and health presentations to350dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




various Aussie organizations, and she asks only for direct travel expenses and adonation to ASHGI. Dog medical genetics might be fully commercialized incompanies such as OptiGen, VetGen, and others, but the health activists sup-port their work for dogs largely out of their own funds. The same pattern hasbeen the subject of study in human health support systems and activist organi-zations, for example, in the stunning amount of volunteer time and expertise re -quired of the parents of autistic children. This combination of well-capitalized,for-proﬁt biomedicine with the extensive, knowledgeable, volunteer labor neces-sary to the system is typical of contemporary biomedical capitalism across thespecies divide. See Chloe Silverman, “Interest Groups, Social Movements, orCorporations? Strategies for Collective Action as Biological Citizens,” in LivelyCapital,ed. Kaushik Sunder Rajan (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,under review). Biological citizenship is a fundamental concept in science studiesscholarship. (See note , below.) Sharp is quite savvy about the political econ-omy of genomic and postgenomic research. As she said in our interview onNovember , , “Survival in research used to be ‘publish or perish’; now it’s‘sell or perish.’” She and other dog activists are also keenly aware of how muchof a boost to canine health-centered questions has been given by the publicationof the full dog genome in the context of comparative medical genomics, with itsutility to scientists interested in human diseases and access to that kind of infra-structure and money. After the National Human Genome Research Institutemade the dog genome a priority, progress in sequencing and mapping was rapid.A rough draft based on a poodle was published in , and in the boxerTasha was made famous by the publication in a free public database of a per-cent complete DNA sequence of her genome (with comparisons of sequences inmultiple regions to data from ten other dogs). The research dogs came frombreed clubs and vet schools. See Kerstin Lindblad-Toh et al., “Genome Sequence,Comparative Analysis, and Haplotype Structure of the Domestic Dog,” Nature(December , ): –. Numerous authors and the key institutions ofbig-time biotech research showed up on the title page, including the Broad Insti-tute, NHGRI, Harvard, and MIT.36.See C. A. Sharp, “Collie Eye Anomaly in Australian Shepherds,”DHNN, no. (Summer ): –. Much of my story is drawn from this essay.37.In , the Canine Diversity Project Web site was www.canine-genetics.com/. After Armstrong’s death, the Listserv became canine-genetics.com on Yahoo. The list is still worthwhile, but the salad days of discussion,when conversion experiences about diversity were the order of the day, werebetween and Armstrong’s death in August .NOTES TO CHAPTER 4d351




38.Unfortunately, the course is no longer oﬀered, but see www.ansci.cornell.edu/cat/cg/cg.html (accessed May , ).39.For example, in Sharp’s analyses of pedigrees, identiﬁcation of dogswith genetic problems, and assessment of disease risks from a planned mating,she has never “named names” without the written permission of the owner of theaﬀected dog or the progenitors of that dog or both. She will not do a pedigreeanalysis for a proposed mating unless both parents are owned by the same per-son, partly to prevent “ﬁshing expeditions” that could cause either deliberate orinadvertent harm to breeders and partly to protect herself from retribution ifone side of a proposed cross receives worse news than the other. Sharp sent ane-mail on September , , to a small group of her colleagues and friends ask-ing for help in thinking about what risks she could and could not take in sharingdata, when her commitments to openness and her refusal to be bullied put herin ethical, legal, and ﬁnancial dilemmas. With information supplied to her byAussie owners and breeders and data from open databases when available, shetracked about two dozen traits and conditions in the breed by and can tracksome of them back more than two decades. Without the statistics produced bya National Institutes of Health equivalent for dogs (data cost a lot of money andorganization to produce), Sharp does not have a complete picture, but she’s gotthe best health archives possible for Aussies in current sociotechnical conditionsin dogland. The need for an institutional home for those data is patent.40.For behavioral genetic research, see http://psych.ucsf.edu/kbehavioralgenetics/ (accessed May , ).41.C. A. Sharp, “ASHGI: Years of Dedication to Breed Health,”DHNN, no. (Spring ): –.42.Intended to bring together breed health organizations and research -ers, the Canine Health Foundation conferences are sponsored by the AKC andthe Nestlé Purina PetCare Company. Because of the DHNN,Sharp attended asa member of the press. She went with what she called her laundry list of activistsand researchers with whom she wanted to talk. In , about three hundredpeople attended the conference, in St. Louis, which focused on the canine genomeand cancer. See DHNN, no. (Fall ): , . Having corresponded for acouple of years, Sharp and geneticist Sheila Schmutz met in person at the ﬁrstCHF conference. Now a friend and collaborator, Schmutz is also a reader fordrafts of Sharp’s book manuscript on genetics for breeders. Sharp’s contacts withscientists come about in various ways, including brief e-mail self-introductionsand references to the ASHGI Web site. These introductions frequently go un-answered, but sometimes productive connections develop. Sharp sees one of her352dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




roles to be educating scientists about purebred-dog people’s concerns and cul-tures so that whole-dog matters, such as grief about genetic disease, make moresense in the lab world.43.Her kennel Web site is www.foxwoodkennel.com/ (accessed May ,). Monti breeds rarely and very carefully. The “Ten Steps” pledge is promi-nent on her Web site. Practicing what she preaches, she lists the numerical scoresfor a long list of health concerns for a planned breeding. The scores indicate arange of probability that a given diﬃculty might result from the breeding. Farfrom suggesting that Foxwood breeds unhealthy dogs, Monti’s practice opera-tionalizes honesty and awareness that all biological critters are mortal. No pure-bred union (and no mutt breeding either) can claim to have no potential fortrouble. A breeder’s unwillingness to address any problems in the history of hisor her dogs with potential buyers is a good indication of an unethical breeder ora puppy mill. Monti’s potential puppy buyers can see the probability scores aswell as a great deal of other information about the dogs, and they will ﬁnd abreeder willing to answer their questions openly. No Ostrich Syndrome here!Perusing purebred Web sites on the Internet will quickly show how rare thisdegree of openness is. Monti also works hard to place her dogs in homes wherethey will have a real job—search and rescue, agility, herding, or something else.44.See Kim Monti, “Stylish Footwork: -Steps for Health,” DHNN,no. (Spring ): –, for an account of the history of Ten Steps.45.See C. A. Sharp, “The Dirty Dozen Plus a Few: Frequency of Hered-itary Disease in Australian Shepherds,” DHNN, no. (Summer ): –.The ASHGI Web site gives more detailed information on every condition ofinterest.46.C. A. Sharp, “The Road to Hell: Epilepsy and the Australian Shep-herd,” Australian Shepherd Journal, no. (July/August ), www.ashgi.org/articles/epilepsy_road_hell.htm.47.C. A. Sharp, “The Biggest Problem,” DHNN, no. (Summer ):–, .48.Epilepsy has a long history as a stigmatizing disease among humanbeings, too, and as a condition whose diagnosis and interpretation are wildlyvariable. The classic scholarly history up to modern neurology is Oswei Tempkin,The Falling Sickness(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, , rev. ed.,). If the reader persists in being interested in Homo sapiensin the face ofthe importance of dogs, see also Fiorella Gurrieri and Romeo Carrozzo, eds.,“The Genetics of Epilepsy,” American Journal of Medical Genetics,Special Issue,, no. , published online, September , . The history of epilepsy amongNOTES TO CHAPTER 4d353




artists and other exceptional people makes me wonder if there are compensa-tions for dogs, too, in their terrible experiences of the disease. I also can’t help butwonder what the incidence of epilepsy is among Sharp’s Incorrigibles in dogland.Are they incapable of empathy or too consumed by it?49.See www.tobysfoundation.org/Ads_Archive.htm (accessed May ,). The Web site permits the downloading of pdf ﬁles of all of the ads fromToby’s Foundation. Pam Douglas and Toby’s story is told by Stevens Parr, “TheFace of Epilepsy: How One Pet Owner Is Staring It Down,” Australian ShepherdJournal,September/October , available on www.tobysfoundation.org.Thanks to Douglas for permission to reprint the ad “The Face of Epilepsy.”50.Parr, “The Face of Epilepsy,” .51.Some knowledgeable dog people were not so sorry to see VetGen outof the picture. The company’s successful legal attack for patent infringement onanother company that sells DNA diagnostic tests for dogs (GeneSearch) did notindicate a major commitment to a more open and collaborative medical geneticculture. The disputed test was for canine von Willebrand disease. My peopleworried that VetGen might develop a test ﬁrst, but its cost and conditions of usemight be far from ideal. VetGen’s view was posted on www.vetgen.com/legal&public_docs.html (accessed November , no longer available on May ,). The court case in which VetGen defeated GeneSearch was decided onJuly , , by the U.S. District for the Eastern District of Michigan.52.Sheila Rothman, “Serendipity in Science: How  BRCA Gene Muta-tions Became Ashkenazi Jewish,” paper delivered at the workshop Ethical Worldof Stem Cell Medicine, University of California at Berkeley, September , ;Gina Kolata, “Using Genetic Tests, Ashkenazi Jews Vanquish a Disease,” NewYork Times,February , , http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?sec=health&res=FEDEAFBACACB. In Online Sci-ence and Technology Newsfrom May , , in an article titled “Jewish SectEmbraces Technology to Save Its Own: The Ashkenazi Jews of New York HaveTurned to Genetic Screening to Save the Lives of Their Children,” www.stnews.org/rlr-.htm, Deborah Pardo-Kaplan writes: “Through a voluntary,conﬁdential screening program called Chevra Dor Yeshorim, or ‘Associationof an Upright Generation,’ unmarried Orthodox Jewish adults worldwide canbe tested to ﬁnd out if they carry the gene for Tay-Sachs. Each person testedreceives a blood test and an identiﬁcation number. Before dating, both membersof the potential couple call Chevra Dor Yeshorim’s automated hotline and entertheir ID numbers. If both test positive for the Tay-Sachs gene, they are told theyare considered unsuitable marriage partners because of the one-in-four chance354dNOTES TO CHAPTER 4




their children will develop the disease.” In an e-mail of October , , RaynaRapp, a New York anthropologist who studies genetic citizenship and responseto genetic diagnosis, told me, “In thesecular programs, one Ashkenazi grandpar-ent‘counts’ to strongly recommend Tay-Sachs screening; among the ultra ortho-dox who use CDY’s program (not everyone!!!), direct screening is undertaken onall teens, so that no potentially ‘incompatible’ matches will be suggested.” SeeRayna Rapp, Testing Women, Testing the Fetus: The Social Impact of Amniocente-sis in America(New York: Routledge, ).On genetic citizenship, see Rayna Rapp, “Cell Life and Death, Child Lifeand Death: Genomic Horizons, Genetic Diseases, Family Stories,” in RemakingLife and Death,ed. Franklin and Lock, –; Karen-Sue Taussig, “The Molec-ular Revolution in Medicine: Promise, Reality, and Social Organization,” inComplexities: Anthropological Challenges to Reductive Accounts of Biosocial Life,ed.S. McKinnon and S. Silverman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ),–; Deborah Heath, Rayna Rapp, and Karen-Sue Taussig, “Genetic Citi-zenship,” in A Companion to Political Anthropology,ed. D. Nugent and J. Vincent(London: Blackwell, ), –; and Rayna Rapp, Karen Sue Taussig, andDeborah Heath, “Standing on the Biological Horizon,” in progress for Critique ofAnthropology.53.Charis Thompson Cussins, “Confessions of a Bioterrorist,” in PlayingDolly: Technocultural Formations, Fantasies, and Fictions of Assisted Reproduction,ed. E. Ann Kaplan and Susan Squier (New York: Routledge, ), –.54.Susan Conant’s many dog sleuth novels, with those beautiful mala-mutes, are hugely popular in dogland, even with all of our snide remarks abouther unshakeable loyalty to the AKC. For her take on puppy millers, geneticdisasters, and irresponsible breeding, see Susan Conant, Evil Breeding(NewYork: Bantam, ) and Bloodlines(New York: Bantam, ). See also Laur-ien Ber enson, A Pedigree to Die For(New York: Kensington Publishing Corp.,).5. CLONING MUTTS, SAVING TIGERSA snapshot of a turn-of-the-century moment in a rapidly morphing drama, thischapter, revised in for When Species Meet,was originally written for a work-shop in May at the School of American Research and was ﬁrst revised infor inclusion in Remaking Life and Death,ed. Franklin and Lock.1.G. Evelyn Hutchinson, The Ecological Theater and the EvolutionaryPlay(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, ); Rabinow, “ArtiﬁcialityNOTES TO CHAPTER 5d355




and Enlightenment”; Latour, We Have Never Been Modern;Haraway, Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.2.Chris Cuomo, Feminism and Ecological Communities: An Ethic of Flour- ishing(New York: Routledge, ), .3.GeoﬀBowker and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classiﬁcationand Its Consequences(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, ), –.4.Bruce Fogle, ed., Interrelations between People and Pets(Springﬁeld, Ill.:C. C. Thomas, ); Aaron Katcher and Allen M. Beck, eds., New Perspectiveson Our Lives with Companion Animals(Philadelphia: University of PennsylvaniaPress, ); Anthony Podberscek, Elizabeth S. Paul, and James A. Serpell, eds.,Companion Animals and Us: Exploring the Relationship between People and Pets(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ); Victoria Voith and Peter L.Borchert, eds., Readings in Companion Animal Behavior(Trenton, N.J.: Veteri-nary Learning Systems, ); Cindy C. Wilson and Dennis C. Turner, eds.,Companion Animals in Human Health(Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publica-tions, ). For a fuller picture of the literature on companion dogs and humanhealth, see Franklin, Emmison, Haraway, and Travers, “Investigating the Thera-peutic Beneﬁts of Companion Animals.”5.I would now demote the language of emergence in favor of reciprocalinductions in order to stress that there is no emergence from a thing in itself, butalways a relational knot of intra- and interactions.6.The DNA Files II,Sound Vision Productions, NPR, October , .7.Leslie Pray, “Missyplicity Goes Commercial,” Scientist, no. ():, www.the-scientist.com/article/display//. Pray was quoting LouHawthorne, the CEO of Genetic Savings and Clone, Inc. John Sperling, the nolonger anonymous donor, committed another nine million dollars, and the com-pany relocated to Sausalito, California, from College Station, Texas. BillionaireJohn Sperling is said to have spent more than nineteen million dollars trying toclone his life partner’s dog Missy in the more than seven years the project existed.Sperling is a futurist also involved in the (human) life extension movement andthe funding of Biosphere. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Sperling;and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere. Lou Hawthorne is the son ofJoan Hawthorne, Missy’s human. When Missy died, Sperling and Joan Haw -thorne sought a new dog from dog shelters, which is where Missy came fromas well.8.Sarah Franklin, Embodied Progress: A Cultural Account of Assisted Con-ception(London: Routledge, ); Marilyn Strathern, The Gender of the Gift:Problems with Women and Problems with Society in Melanesia(Berkeley and Los356dNOTES TO CHAPTER 5




Angeles: University of California Press, ); Marilyn Strathern, Reproducingthe Future: Anthropology, Kinship and the New Reproductive Technologies(NewYork: Routledge, ).9.Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of MedicalPerception,trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon, ).10.I rely on a two-day formal interview with Weisser, December –,, at her home in Olympia, Washington, where I also met her magniﬁcentdogs; three years’ of postings on Pyr-L@apple.ease.lsoft.com, a discussion groupwith about ﬁve hundred subscribers in , founded in and run byWeisser, Catherine de la Cruz, Judy Gustafson, Karen Reiter, and Janet Frashé(the collective computer expertise of these women is not trivial to their dogwork); numerous private e-mails; and ongoing personal contacts. I lived forseven years in the same extended household with a Great Pyrenees, WillemdeKoonig, who was bred by Weisser. Weisser acts on the ethical commitment totrack dogs she breeds throughout their lives and support both them and theirpeople. After a rear leg amputation for bone cancer in June , Willem expe-rienced metastases to his lungs in December; he was euthanized among hishuman and cat friends. The breeder remained available and vulnerable withinthis knot of mortal companion species. I also draw on conversations and inter-views with Catherine de la Cruz and from the pleasure of meeting some of herdogs. She guided me through the discussion list LGD-L, a rich resource forlearning about the several kinds of working livestock guardian dogs on farms,ranches, and hobby suburban properties.11.Chapter , “Examined Lives,” tracks the institutional rearrangementsand activist struggle for open registries up to .12.The ﬁrst U.S. breed open registries for genetic diseases were the PRAData (started by Georgia Gooch, a Lab retriever breeder, in , to deal withprogressive retinal atrophy) and the West Highland Anomaly Task Council(WatcH), which was started in and registered three diseases by .13.de la Cruz, Pyr-L@apple.ease.lsoft.com, August , .14.See, for example, World Conservation Strategy,IUCN, ; the Brunt-land Report, Our Common Future,WECD, ; Convention on Biodiversity,; Valuing Nature’s Services,WorldWatch Institute Report of Progress towarda Sustainable Society, ; Investing in Biological Diversity,Cairns Conference,OECD, ; and Saving Biological Diversity: Economic Incentives,OECD, .For a sketch of biodiversity discourses in this period, see E. O. Wilson, ed., Bio-diversity(Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, ); and E. O. Wilson,The Diversity of Life(New York: Norton, ).NOTES TO CHAPTER 5d357




15.The Canine Diversity Project is at www.canine-genetics.com/ (accessedMay , ). The site was last updated in .16.See Susan Harding, The Book of Jerry Falwell(Princeton, N.J.: Prince-ton University Press, ), for an analysis of how conversion discourse works.17.In May , clicking on “Species Survival Plan” took one instead tothe World Wildlife Fund–Canada page on conservation projects.18.SSPis a North American term. Species Survival Plan® Program isregistered by the AZA. See www.aza.org/ConScience/ConScienceSSPFact/(accessed May , ). See also European endangered species programs (EESPs)and Australasian species management programs. China, Japan, India, Thailand,Malaysia, and Indonesia have their own equivalents for this global technoscienceof indigenous species.19.See chapter , “Value-Added Dogs,” for a summary of the nonpet, bio-medical dog cloning project in the lab of Hwang Woo-Suk of the Seoul NationalUniversity. The cloned Afghan hound, Snuppy, was born in in that project.20.The site in was www.missyplicity.com. After Texas A&M re -searchers and John Sperling’s money parted in , the project was continuedentirely within Genetics Savings and Clone, Inc., which was founded in Feb-ruary , moved from Texas to California, and closed its doors in October. The Web site www.savingsandclone.com came down by December ,and customers for the cryopreservation service were referred to ViaGen at www.viagen.com/our-services/preserving-your-pets/, with the note that “ViaGen hasno plans to provide commercial cat or dog cloning services.”21.www.animalcloningsciences.com (accessed spring ). Headquar-tered in Rancho Mirage, California, Animal Cloning Sciences, Inc., in ,advertised its research in cloning horses.22.The Web site address in was www.lazaron.com. The companybecame Lazaron Biotechnologies (SA), Ltd., advertising “stem cell expertisefor Africa” in a “globally networked center of excellence,” www.lazaron.co.za/(accessed November ). The heir of cloning idioms, “regenerative cell tech-nology” was the language of the stem cell world in . The Web site stated that“the company’s initial primary business goal is to establish the ﬁrst human cordblood stem cell bank in Africa.” Lazaron has further elaborated on its “bioethi-cal” goal in of “saving a genetic life.” The link to research gave the followingproﬁle for the company in :Through the company’s Animal Bio-cell Division, short tomedium term projects have already been identiﬁed, and are being358dNOTES TO CHAPTER 5




further researched and developed at Stellenbosch University in aresearch program that ends . It is envisaged that the outcomeof this research will inter alia enable Lazaron to oﬀer regenerativeveterinary cell replacement therapy to the race horse industryand more speciﬁcally aimed at tendon regeneration.Diﬀerent assisted reproductive and biotechnology techniques are used to:)produce disease-free Cape buﬀalo calves to replace the diminishingnumbers of this species dying of tuberculosis in our game parks;)store genetic material of wildlife and valuable livestock and petspecies for future cloning procedures;)produce test tube animal babies where natural breeding of thespecies is not possible;)collect and store animal stem cells from valuable animals like race-horses and superior male animals;)apply stem cell therapies for the regeneration of torn and damagedtendons;)develop animal models for the study of the therapeutic use of stemcells in human medicine;)investigate alternative methods of somatic and stem cell culture, e.g.under weightlessness conditions.23.John Cargill and Susan Thorpe Vargas, “Seeing Double: The Futureof Dog Cloning,” DogWorld, no. (): –.24.www.savingsandclone.com/ethics (accessed –).25.www.missyplicity.com/goals (accessed –).26.www.tamu.edu/researchandgradstudies, ﬁgures (accessed ).27.www.missyplicity.com/team (accessed ).28.www.cnn.com/earth//hartebeast (accessed ). Note thatLazaron Biotechnologies (SA), Ltd., had many of the same goals near the endof the decade. Instruments such as an SSP and a cryopreservation lab had morethan a little in common as conservation and reproduction strategies in techno-culture. Sarah Franklin’s Dolly Mixturesprepares one to understand such con-vergences in the details of cross-continental practice.29.www.tamu.edu/researchandgradstudies/scicoa/tamu.html(accessed ).30.Thanks to Linda Hogle for an audio tape of the whole event and apreprint of Hawthorne’s presentation, as well as for highlighting the endangeredspecies remarks.NOTES TO CHAPTER 5d359




31.Joseph Dumit, “Playing Truths: Logics of Seeking and the Persistenceof the New Age,” Focaal(): –.32.Lou Hawthorne, “The Ethics of Cloning Companion Animals,” pre -print for Stanford University’s Ethics in Society Program, May , . All fur-ther quotations of Hawthorne are drawn from this preprint.6. ABLE BODIES AND COMPANION SPECIES1.Two of my older brother’s children, Mark and Debra, learned Dad’sscoring system. Mark said that, across the gulfs of a continent and their own par-ents’ divorce, this way of scoring bound them to a grandfather they barely knew.To be literate in my family means knowing how to code the plays so that a gamecan be reconstructed in dramatic detail years later. Katie King, Networked Re-enactments(under review), teaches me how writing technologies make persons.See www.womensstudies.umd.edu/wmstfac/kking/ (accessed May , ).2.My reﬂections on “regard” are in conversation with Wlad Godzich,whose December , , e-mail response to my talk at the Bodies in the Mak-ing conference was both moving and helpful.3.See Haraway, The Companion Species Manifesto;Tsing, “Unruly Edges”;and Despret, “The Body We Care For.” For the join of optics and haptics inspecies encounters, see Eva Shawn Hayward, “Jellyﬁsh Optics: Immersion inMarine TechnoEcology,” paper presented at the October meetings of theSociety for Literature and Science, Durham, N.C.4.Karen Barad, “Invertebrate Visions: Diﬀractions, Mutations, Re(con)-ﬁgurations, and the Ethics of Mattering,” in Meeting the Universe Halfway;AstridSchrader, “Temporal Ecologies and Political Phase–Spaces: Dinoﬂagellate Tem-poralities in Intra-action,” paper presented at the October meetings of theSociety for Social Studies of Science, Pasadena, California.5.Thompson, Making Parents.6.My own guess is that Dad fell because TB had already undermined hisbones, not that TB was stimulated by falling. Interpretive options of this kindpepper the telling of any story, especially family stories. The line between ﬁctionand fact runs through the living room.7.For a lively account of the game and its people, see Jerome Charyn, Siz-zling Chops and Devilish Spins: Ping Pong and the Art of Staying Alive(New York:Four Wall, Eight Windows Press, ).8.For thinking about this sort of thing within actor-network theoryin science and technology studies, see Myriam Winance, “Trying Out the360dNOTES TO CHAPTER 6




Wheelchair: The Mutual Shaping of People and Devices through Adjustment,”Science, Technology, and Human Values, no. (January ): –.9.I read about some of the secrets of the craft in a book I found in Dad’slibrary after he died: Harry E. Heath, How to Cover, Write, and Edit Sports(Ames: Iowa State College Press, ). Sports covered: baseball, basketball,football, hockey, boxing, tennis. The baseball scoring system in this book seemsmuch less nimble to me than Dad’s. I would be surprised if Dad ever readHeath’s tome.8. TRAINING IN THE CONTACT ZONE1.Gaëtanelle Gilquin and George M. Jacobs, “Elephants Who MarryMice Are Very Unusual: The Use of the Relative Pronoun (Who) with Nonhu-man Animals,” Society and Animals, no. (): –.2.Clutton-Brock, A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals.For dogs,see Serpell, ed., The Domestic Dog;Raymond and Lorna Coppinger, Dogs: AStartling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behavior, and Evolution(NewYork: Scribner’s, ); and Stephen Budiansky, The Covenant of the Wild: WhyAnimals Chose Domestication(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, ;original ). On evidence from ancient dog burial sites found all over theworld for very early emotional bonds and close association between dogs andpeople, see Morey, “Burying Key Evidence.” For a critical historical perspective,see Barbara Noske, Beyond Boundaries: Humans and Animals(Montreal: BlackRose Books, ). Besides introducing the idea of the “animal–industrial com-plex,” Noske sketches the complexity of human–animal relations in domestica-tion over many thousands of years, deﬁning those relations as humans’ alterationof the other animals’ seasonal subsistence cycle but also allowing for a moreactive way in which animals alter human patterns. The ecologies of all the speciesinvolved are at the center of attention in this approach to domestication. Noskealso insists that we regard animals more like science ﬁctional other worlds andless like mirrors or lesser humans.3.Despret, “The Body We Care For”; Despret, “Sheep Do Have Opinions.”4.Haraway, The Companion Species Manifesto.5.Biosocial preconditions for paying attention to each other in the kind oftraining I will discuss are suggested in Brian Harre, Michelle Brown, ChristinaWilliamson, and Michael Tomasello, “The Domestication of Social Cognitionin Dogs,” Science(November , ): –, which presents evidencethat dogs have genetically stabilized abilities to read the behavior of humans,NOTES TO CHAPTER 8d361




abilities that wolves do not have. No one has yet looked for the evidence ofhuman genetically stabilized abilities showing how domestic associates such asdogs and cattle have shaped people, partly because of the dualistic assumptionthat people change culturally, but animals change only biologically, since theyhave no culture. Both parts of this assumption are surely wrong, even makingallowances for irresolvable ﬁghts over what “culture” means among diﬀerent com-munities of practice. So far, genetic researchers have looked only for how thehistory of animal diseases, such as ﬂu, might be written into the human genomeby incorporation of all or part the viral genomes. Retroviruses are of specialinterest, and scientists estimate that about one hundred thousand segments ofthe human genome (i.e., up to percent of the full human DNA complement)are remarkably similar to retroviruses. See Carl Zimmer, “Old Viruses Resur-rected through DNA,” New York Times,November , , D; and N. de Par-seval and Thierry Heidmann, “Human Endogenous Retroviruses: From Infec-tious Elements to Human Genes,” Cytogenetic Genome Research, nos. –(): –. But the genetic record should be rich with potential for under-standing much thicker histories of inter- and intra-action than just viral swap-ping. Comparative molecular genomics will be a valuable tool in rethinking thehistory of entanglements called domestic, including behavioral abilities withinand across species, such as the behavioral abilities of both dogs and people thatallow them to read each other, play with each other, and train with each other.6.The Web site www.doggery.org/ has links to introduce agility, as wellas the dogs I have trained and played with, Roland and Cayenne. The site haslittle pictures of the obstacles and links to organizations and descriptions ofevents. Check www.bayteam.org/index.html and www.cleanrun.com/ for linksto a wealth of agility information. The monthly magazine Clean Runis a majorresource for course designs and analyses, diagrams for practice exercises, train-ing information, equipment descriptions and ads, accounts of the dogs playingthe game, interviews with human players all over the world, reports on nationaland world competitions, sports nutrition information for canine athletes, stressmanagement advice for people and dogs, dog massage instructions, and greatagility pictures. Clean Run, Inc., also hosts an online agility discussion group onyahoo.com, and many more Internet discussion groups are dedicated to aspectsof the game. Many people build their own equipment for practice, and designs canbe found on the Internet. Major agility events are aired on television, and bothtraining videos and videos of major competitions abound (check out www.dogpatch.org/agility/). The Web site www.dogpatch.org/agility/IAL/ial.html is re -plete with information about agility in countries other than the United States.362dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




(All Web sites accessed May , .) The magazine Dog and Handlercovers alldog sports.7.One of the ﬁne consequences of the desire of U.S. folks to compete inthe IFCS world events is that tail docking and ear cutting of American compe-tition dogs will have to stop. Cayenne, an Australian shepherd, might still haveher tail if she had been destined for the world stage. Europeans, unlike their U.S.counterparts, tend not to see black helicopters in the sky when regulations arepassed by a transnational agency to control the behavior of kennels and breed-ers—regulations naming as illegal abuse (which will ban a dog from competi-tion) what the breeder previously saw as only a private matter and club standard.Maybe the pressure will help protect all the other dogs too, but the ﬁght, shame-fully, is a big one, and most dogs aren’t competitive athletes, nor should they haveto be.8.Brenda Fender, “History of Agility, Part ,” Clean Run, no. (July): –.9.For a good sociological study done by researchers who also run withtheir dogs in agility, see Dair Gillespie, Ann Leﬄer, and Elinor Lerner, “If ItWeren’t for My Hobby, I’d Have a Life: Dog Sports, Serious Leisure, andBoundary Negotiations,” paper delivered at the American Sociological Associa-tion section on Animals and Society, Anaheim, California, . Leﬄer pro-vided me with her notes from Power Paws agility camp in Placerville, California,in and . She records for that human students attended, with their dogs. About percent were women. The camper population wasalmost all white, but attendees came from as far as England and Japan. Leﬄerestimated mean and median age to be in the forties. Camp is, as Leﬄer said, atotal immersion experience. Cayenne and I attended the ﬁve-day Power Pawscamp in and and found the experience much as Leﬄer described it.Going to the camp cost us about a thousand dollars each year, counting every-thing. Instructors came from about four countries and all over the United States.About a third of the instructors were men, Leﬄer notes, and the same was truein my years. All the instructors were white, and most were full-time agilityinstructors. They knew one another from World Team, other camps and work-shops, Nationals, and such. Instructors all had very fast dogs such as border col-lies, working-line Aussies, shelties, and Jack Russell terriers. Leﬄer, a Rottweilerhandler, says acidly in her ﬁeld notes, “So much for the notion that there’s roomat the top for amateurs!” Ann Leﬄer, Liberal Arts and Sciences Program, UtahState University, Logan, Utah .10.Karen Pryor, Getting Started: Clicker Training for Dogs(Waltham,NOTES TO CHAPTER 8d363




Mass.: Sunshine Books, ), is a good introduction. Karen Pryor’s clicker gearstore has a Web site: http://clickerpets.stores.yahoo.net/getstarclict.html(accessed May , ). For background on Pryor, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_Pryor. Important books are: Karen Pryor: Don’t Shoot the Dog: TheNew Art of Teaching and Training(New York: Bantam, revised ; original); Karen Pryor on Behavior: Chapters and Research(Waltham, Mass.: Sun-shine Books, ); and Lads before the Wind: Diary of a Dolphin Trainer,rev. ed.(Waltham, Mass.: Sunshine Books, ). See also Susan Garrett: RuﬀLove: ARelationship Building Program for You and Your Dog(Chicopee, Mass.: CleanRun, ); and Shaping Success: The Education of an Unlikely Champion(Chico -pee, Mass.: Clean Run, ). Garrett is an internationally known agility com-petitor and teacher.11.There are many technical wrinkles on this exceedingly simple descrip-tion of positive training, but they are not needed for this chapter.12.I owe my understanding of the prosaic to Gillian Goslinga, “VirginBirth in South India: Childless Women, Spirit Possession, and the Prose of theModern World,” PhD dissertation, University of California at Santa Cruz, June. I am also indebted to Isabelle Stengers’s understanding how the abstrac-tions of science push one to imagine new manifestations, which only make sensein prosaic details.13.For a long time, because politics, including the politics of race, class,and sexuality, were so inaudible, I thought agility was full of conventional, straightor closeted, conservative, mostly white, middle-class U.S. humans. Used to theﬂourishing and rarely understated left, antiracist, feminist, lesbian, gay, and transcultures of Santa Cruz, I misjudged the human social world of agility. To be sure,there were plenty of Bush supporters during the early months of the invasionof Iraq in —made painfully clear by the crop of red, white, and blue ﬂag-waving paraphernalia, from portable chairs to dog collars and even one poordyed dog, which blossomed in the “war on terror.” Also, I have not spent so muchtime since the mid-s in a culture in which it is so diﬃcult to tell who is gayand in which so many of my usually rather savvy guesses have turned out to bewrong. Some of that, I still think, is a reﬂection of heteronormative worlds inwhich the “straight” still just is, and conscious and unconscious conformity istaken for granted. On the other hand, I was often wrong because my universityculture’s usual markers were not informative, and for a great many of the womenwho play agility, gay or straight, the paucity of men and children is what is reallytaken for granted most of the time, for better and for worse. I found a revealingjoke burned onto a wooden plaque for sale in a booth at one agility meet: “Back364dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




Sunday night. Feed the children.” Further, I now think that the interspecies coreof the practice of agility actively leads its humans most of the time to protectspaces free of politics-as-usual, in which people who would otherwise ﬂy apartin mutually dismissive judgment can continue to learn from and play with oneanother and their canine partners. Agility sites are also largely free of any work,whether in the home or on the job, besides the considerable labor that it takes toput on a match. With the exception of paid judges, who are not getting rich onthese weekends, almost all of the labor of putting on an agility trial is volunteerand widely shared. Possible germs for a more robust civic culture, these freespaces are rare and precious in U.S. society, where both excess busyness and thesearch for those we agree with seem to take precedence over actually thinkingwith someone diﬀerent from oneself. Little by little, I discovered agility to be asite where many people build friendship networks in which intellectual andpolitical matters are quite lively and openly discussed between runs, sometimes“intersectionally” with people’s knowledge and passion about dogs, but moreoften separately. In addition, it takes a great deal of time in agility worlds to cometo know how people make or made their livings and how many people have seri-ous accomplishments—in and out of paid jobs—to their credit besides thosein dogs. By now, I am much less sure where the closets are and much more in -trigued by the spaces opened up by putting dogs at the center of attention andgoing very slowly into the other things that make up the lives of agility people.My tennis-playing human life mate, Rusten, thinks this understated, slowlydiscovered, and very rich quality broadly typiﬁes seriously played, amateur, par-ticipant sports outside the American corporate professional sports culture. Inow agree.14.Yellow is not accidental. Dogs see yellow and blue quite well. The redand green of plush holiday dog toys notwithstanding, dogs do not see those col-ors well at all. See Stanley Coren, How Dogs Think(New York: Free Press,), –. If the A-frame is painted green and yellow (which is sometimesthe case), dogs have a much harder time distinguishing the contact zone visuallythan if it is painted blue and yellow. Green looks yellowish to a dog. But the colordemarcation is not the most relevant variable in a well-educated dog’s contact-obstacle performance.15.Susan Conant, Black Ribbon(New York: Bantam, ). The scene ofthe A-frame murder is a dog sports summer camp. An A-frame falling on ahuman head has a baleful eﬀect.16.Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation(New York: Routledge, ), –.NOTES TO CHAPTER 8d365




17.James Cliﬀord, Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late TwentiethCentury(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, ), .18.Naomi Mitchison, Memoirs of a Spacewoman(London: Women’s Press,; original ); Suzette Haden Elgin, Native Tongue(New York: DawBooks, ); Samuel R. Delany, Babel (New York: Ace Books, ).19.See Elna Bakker, An Island Called California: An Ecological Introduc-tion to Its Natural Communities,nd ed. (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Universityof California Press, ), –, for a discussion of the contemporary mixedassemblages of Arcto-Tertiary and Madro-Tertiary tree species. Ecotones andedge eﬀects are geotemporal as well as niche-spatial processes.20.Juanita Sundberg, “Conservation Encounters: Transculturation in the‘Contact Zones’ of Empire,” Cultural Geography, no. (): –.21.Tsing, “Unruly Edges,” ms. .22.Eduardo Kohn, “How Dogs Dream,” American Ethnologist, no. (). The quotation is from a personal e-mail communication, November ,. Kohn is preparing a book titled Toward an Anthropology of Life: Amazon-ian Natures and the Politics of Trans-species Engagement.23.Scott Gilbert, Developmental Biology,th ed. (Sunderland, Mass.: Sin-auer Associates, ).24.On chreodes as stabilized channels in landscapes of developmentalprobability and developmental interactions, see C. H. Waddington, The Evolu-tion of an Evolutionist(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, ). Waddingtonwrote extensively about “epigenetic landscapes.” See Scott F. Gilbert, “EpigeneticLandscaping: C. H. Waddington’s Use of Cell Fate Bifurcation Diagrams,” Biol-ogy and Philosophy(): –. See also Scott F. Gilbert, “Induction andthe Origins of Developmental Genetics,” in A Conceptual History of ModernEmbryology,ed. Scott Gilbert (New York: Plenum, ), –; and Scott F.Gilbert and Steven Borish, “How Cells Learn, How Cells Teach: Educationwithin the Body,” in Change and Development: Issues of Theory, Method, and Appli-cation,ed. A. Reninger and E. Amsel (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, ),–. For discussion of Waddington’s chreodes and approaches to developmentin relation to Whitehead’s process philosophy, see James Bono, “Perception, Liv-ing Matter, Cognitive Systems, Immune Networks: A Whiteheadian Future forScience Studies,” forthcoming. For Waddington in the history of embryology, seeDonna Haraway, Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields: Metaphors That Shape Embryos(Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, ; original Yale University Press, ).25.Scott F. Gilbert and Jessica A. Bolker, “Ecological Developmental Biol-ogy: Preface to a Symposium,” Evolution and Development, no. (): –.366dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




The direct induction of gene expression in a multicellular organism by its micro-bial symbionts is now considered a normal and crucial developmental mecha-nism. See Scott F. Gilbert: “Mechanisms for the Environmental Regulation ofGene Expression,” Birth Defects Research (Part C)(); and “CellularDialogues during Development,” Gene Regulation and Fetal Development, no.(): –.26.Gilbert, Developmental Biology,; Margaret McFall-Ngai, “UnseenForces: The Inﬂuence of Bacteria on Animal Development,” Developmental Biol-ogy, no. (): –.27.Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway.For a beautiful analysis thatjoins biologist Joanne Burkholder’s studies of the multispeciﬁc, multimorphicintra-actions of a polymorphous dinoﬂagellate, ﬁsh, pigs, chickens, and peoplein the Chesapeake Bay region with philosopher Jacques Derrida’s theory ofthe phantom and its temporality, see Astrid Schrader, “Phantomatic SpeciesOntologies: Untimely Re/productions of Toxic Dinoﬂagellates,” paper pre-sented at the meetings of the Society for Social Studies of Science, Vancouver,B.C., November –, . To think about contact zones from the ecology ofstructural chemistry rather than physics or biology, see the remarkable join ofdancing, protein structural modeling, haptic–optic–kinesthetic knotting enactedon-screen, and the shaping of scientists in Natasha Myers, “Molecular Embodi-ments and the Body-Work of Modeling in Protein Crystallography,” Social Stud-ies of Science,forthcoming. For a view of co-constitutions and contact zonesamong variously situated salmon and people, see Heather Swanson, “WhenHatchery Salmon Go Wild: Population-Making, Genetic Management, and theEndangered Species Act,” meetings of the Society for Social Studies of Science,Vancouver, B.C., November –, .28.Heidegger’s notion of the open is quite diﬀerent from mine. I followGiorgio Agamben’s explication of the importance of “profound boredom” forHeidegger’s “open.” Agamben, The Open,–. Heidegger’s open emerges froma radical disengagement from the dross of functionality to acknowledge theawful, essential purposelessness of man, who is deﬁned by no ﬁxed world, nonature, no given place. To achieve this great voiding of illusion, to grasp “negativ-ity,” to be free, to understand one’s captivity rather than merely to live it as ananimal (“awakening fromits own captivation toits own captivation,” ibid., ), aman in Heidegger’s story allows the terrible experience of profound boredomto drench his whole self. Nothing need be done, no attachment is necessary,nothing motivates, one need not act. No animal can experience this state (andno woman qua“woman”). Yet, only from there can unconcealment, the open,NOTES TO CHAPTER 8d367




happen. Only from this great destroying and liberating antiteleological negativ-ity, this perfect indiﬀerence, can Dasein(“being held suspended in the nothing,”ibid., ), true human being, emerge. Only from this “open” can man grasp theworld with passion, not as stock and resource, but in unconcealment and disclo-sure freed from technique and function. Precisely what diﬀerentiates man andanimal, what puts them into opposite and unbridgeable singularities, is the pos-sibility of“profound boredom,” utter disconnection from function, for man, andthe animal’s inescapable poverty of world through an unbreakable tie to functionand determined attachment. My “open” is quite other, if similarly lustful fornonteleological understanding. It emerges from the shock of “getting it”: Thisand hereare who and where we are? What is to be done? How can respect andresponse ﬂourish in thishere and thiswe, even as this weis the fruit of the entan-glement? At least as wrenching from the busy self-assured life as Heidegger’slittle scenario, the shock of “getting it” could hardly be further from “profoundboredom.” Never certain, never guaranteed, the “open” for companion speciesbecomes possible in the contact zones and unruly edges. For ongoing fruitfulphilosophical engagement with Heidegger’s work on Daseinbut reformattedfrom a human–animal studies perspective, see Jake Metcalf, “Intimacy withoutProximity: Encountering Grizzlies as Companion Species,” paper presented atthe meetings of the Society for Social Studies of Science, Vancouver, B.C.,November –, .29.See Sutherland, Kicked, Bitten, and Scratched,.30.Vicki Hearne believed something similar, but I have left her out of thischapter, because I wanted to inhabit the positive-method training approachesshe never stopped despising. Hearne, Adam’s Task.I mutate Hearne’s idiom ofanimal happiness with gratitude for her extraordinary insights and analyses.See Vicki Hearne, Animal Happiness(New York: HarperCollins, ). CaryWolfe’s treatment of Hearne is simultaneously sympathetic and sharply criticalof her humanist philosophical straitjackets: Wolfe, “Old Orders for New,” –. Mary Weaver—a fellow dog enthusiast committed to the good name of pitbulls who understands the knot of surprise, discipline, body, aﬀect, and freedomin such relationships—also shapes my thinking in her writing on humantransembodiments. See Mary Weaver, “Aﬀective Materialities and TransgenderEmbodiments,” paper presented at the meetings of the Society for Social Stud-ies of Science, Vancouver, B.C., November –, .31.Cayenne is neurologically deaf in one ear and so gets no directional ordistance information from sound. A rock-solid recall and a no-nonsense “turnand search for me” command are both essential for her to be safe when we walk368dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




in the woods, or anywhere else, for that matter. She also wears a sheep bell so Ican track her if she can’t ﬁnd her way back to me. She reliably responded to the“search for me” cue by the time she was twelve weeks old. I think the deer andfoxes also appreciate the bell. The snakes, lacking an aural apparatus, cannot hearthe bell’s tones, but perhaps they take precautions from the vibrations of mydog’s footfalls when she courses over the hills above Mill Creek.32.This is less Vicki Hearne’s idea of animal happiness than Ian Wedde’s.Respectful of dogs’ diﬀerences from humans, Wedde ruminated on Epicurusand Seneca when he went with the ridgeback Vincent to an oﬀ-leash park onMount Victoria, in New Zealand. They were together, but it was Vincent’s owndoggy interests that instructed Wedde, watching without imposing himself.“Epicurus advocated friendship, freedom, and thought as the foundations uponwhich to build happiness. . . . The Stoics believed that unreasonable expectationsare what make us unhappy; some thought is best done in a simple, vivid, sensorypresent, rather than in the frantic, dystopic realms of desire and over-cookedimagination. I learned to think better as a result of running with Vincent. . . .One of the good things about the dog’s utter diﬀerence is that he extends therange of what’s mysterious in the world; he enriches my ignorance. It’s this sense,I think, that many of the Mount Victoria dog-walkers share. . . . The ones whoare empathic about their dogs’ freedom and social life are humorous . . . theylaugh, but without scorn. . . . But the leash-tuggers are seldom humorous . . . andtheir dogs are often unsocial, anxious, scared, and aggressive. I think it’s becausethey don’t understand their need for social freedom. They need to read Epicurusand Seneca, not training manuals.” Ian Wedde, “Walking the Dog,” in MakingEnds Meet(Wellington, New Zealand: Victoria University Press, ), –. I think we need both those ancients and modern training, not mechanicallyand anxiously, but skillfully and with joy. From personal correspondence, I knowWedde agrees, and he would never call the many-talented Cappuccino unsocial,anxious, scared, and aggressive, nor Pam a leash tugger!33.For the sake of a story, I am not telling what I owe, and the detailedpractices through which I owe it, to my other trainers—Gail Frazier, RobMichalski, and Lauri Plummer. They have all labored mightily to teach me moralcoherence and technical competence with my fast and demanding dog. I am alsoshortchanging the particulars of diﬀerent methods of training contacts and dif-ferent criteria of performance (running contacts, one rear toe on, etc.). The verydiﬀerences, coupled with changing approaches in classes as the sport developed,overwhelmed my neophyte self in the early years. I did not yet have the skill tomake trustworthy judgments; learning how to make such judgments is one ofNOTES TO CHAPTER 8d369




the key things my teachers try to nurture. Contact-zone training is a commonfeature in Clean Run;see, for example, the entire vol. , no. , November issue, including Karen Pryor on using a clicker to build behavior chains in teach-ing contacts, Mary Ellen Barry on prooﬁng contacts, and Susan Garrett on theverbal release.34.Bioanthropologist Barbara Smuts, who now studies dogs after yearsof studying primates and cetaceans, is resolutely more interested in dog–doginteractions than dog–human ones. She is in the midst of fascinating, labor-intensive biobehavioral analysis of many hours of ﬁlm of socializing dogs. I drawfrom Donna Haraway and Barbara Smuts, joint keynote lecture at the meetingsof the Society for Literature and Science (SLS), , Durham, N.C. See alsoBarbara Smuts, “Between Species: Science and Subjectivity,” Conﬁgurations,spe-cial section from SLS meeting in , forthcoming.35.Despret, “The Body We Care For,” .36.Ibid., .37.Ian Wedde described how he, his human life-partner, and Vincentwere attuned in this way that invents new natures in the world. “We were dis-cussing a TV programme she’d produced and noting how hard it was to guaran-tee delivery of intended subtlety conveyed by ‘tone’—the old problem of tellingjokes to strangers. We remembered how hard Vincent had worked, as a pet, tounderstand our tone. We were both sure he had learned to ‘smile’ late in life, aheartbreakingly diﬃcult mimicry of what he’d seen us do over many years when-ever we met him—not a dog-like showing of teeth, but something like a ‘smile,’lower teeth only . . . sad and wonderful” (e-mail to Donna Haraway, August ,). This is another kind of isopraxis. This story also honors the material–semiotic work pets do.38.Philip Pullman: The Golden Compass(New York: Knopf, ); TheSubtle Knife(New York: Knopf, ); The Amber Spyglass(New York: Knopf,).39.Such instruction is readily found in the agility world, for example,expensive workshops by famous trainers to teach people to play with their dogs,magazine articles, demos by friends, and, of course, our dogs’ patient forgive-ness for repeated human gaﬀes, such as stuﬃng a tug toy down a dog’s gullet. SeeDeborah Jones, “Let’s Play!” Clean Run, no. (May ): –; DeborahJones, PhD, and Judy Keller,In Focus: Developing a Working Relationship withYour Performance Dog(Chicopee, Mass.: Clean Run, ).40.Smuts, “Encounters with Animal Minds,” –, .41.Albion M. Urdank, “The Rationalisation of Rural Sport: British370dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




Sheepdog Trials, –,” Rural History, no. (): –, exploresthe interactions of sheep, human beings, and herding dogs in Britain in a periodof profound transformation of rural landscapes, work practices, and economies.The skills of dogs rooted in their biological heritage from wolves—such as eye-ing prey, stalking, driving, bunching, and cutting—are reshaped not just by thebiology of domestic associations with people and herbivores but also by com-mercial matters and other forces in economic and cultural history. Dogs, people,and sheep are all reshaped in ways that can be read in the changing patterns ofsheep trials. “The shepherd’s dog became better bred and better trained thanever before, as the shepherd too became better skilled and educated; and so thesheepdog became, fundamentally, the instrument of a revolution in pastoral pro-ductivity. But because the sheepdog was a living creature, with an especially highintelligence, his [sic] instincts for work were used not just instrumentally, butco-operatively as part of a joint eﬀort, in which dog and shepherd would also cre-ate a special bond of aﬃnity” (). But this is the material semiotics of work, andI am interested in this section in the world-making practices of play. It is worthnoting that sheepdog trial people tend to have great disdain for the methods ofagility trainers, with their toys, food, and behaviorist idiom. My ﬁeld notes recordsheepdog men praising agility as something nice for dogs who don’t have real work.Lots is going on here: gender and rural–suburban tensions, valuations of work andsport, and deeply held beliefs about how dogs learn and what they already know.42.In a beautiful chapter, “Learning from Temple Grandin, or, AnimalStudies, Disability Studies, and Who Comes after the Subject,” Cary Wolfeexplores ways out of the premises of liberal humanism and its language-satedversions of epistemology, ontology, and ethics that Grandin oﬀers in her explo-rations of sensory modalities of knowing, including her treatment of the detailsof her experience as an autistic person of “thinking in pictures.” Grandin cri-tiques the denial of an inner life to autistic people on the basis of the implicitassumption and explicit premise that all that is truly thinking must be linguistic.Wolfe notes that this denial “is founded in no small part on the too rapid assim-ilation of the questions of subjectivity, consciousness, and cognition to the ques-tion of language ability” (Wolfe, “Learning from Temple Grandin,” in ms., ,). That assimilation is common, but not unchallenged, in the biobehavioral sci-ences, but it is ubiquitous and practically mandatory in the social sciences andhumanities. If no language, then no subject and no interiority worth the name,no matter the school of thought preferred, from psychoanalysis to linguistics tophilosophy of whatever stripe. Putting the so-far ill-crafted alliance of disabilitystudies and animal studies together diﬀerently (not Which oppressed group isNOTES TO CHAPTER 8d371




more marginalized?—a bankrupt question if ever there was one), Wolfe reﬁg-ures the relation between assistance dogs and their humans, for example, in workbetween a service dog and a blind human. He writes, “Wouldn’t we do better toimagine this example as an irreducibly diﬀerent and unique form of subjectiv-ity—neither Homo sapiensnor Canis familiaris,neither ‘disabled’ nor ‘normal,’but something else altogether, a shared trans-species being-in-the-world consti-tuted by complex relations of trust, respect, dependence, and communication (asanyone who has ever trained—or relied upon—a service dog would be the ﬁrstto tell you)?” (Wolfe, ibid., ).43.The overachieving German border collie Rico caused a stir when heproved as able as two-year-old human children to do what linguists call “fastmapping” of new words to objects after only one exposure. Rico knew the labelsof over two hundred diﬀerent items, and he remembered his new words when hewas retested four weeks later. It looks like whatever makes fast mapping possibleis part of general cognitive abilities that people share with other critters. SeeJulianne Kaminski, Joseph Call, and Julia Fisher, “Word Learning in a DomesticDog: Evidence for ‘Fast Mapping,’” Science(June ): –. Thisnews may have been more novel to scientists than to many agility trainers.Cayenne is not exceptional, and I have evidence that she reliably knows aboutto words or phrases in a great variety of circumstances (but not allcircumstances—the power to generalize seems tied to what linguists call theproperty of “discrete inﬁnity,” in which humans deﬁnitely excel. My failure tounderstand the need to teach, one at a time, relevant combinations of circum-stances in which a named item or action would appear—what people think of ascontext but to dogs seems to be the semiotic situation itself—was at the heart ofmy incoherence in the contact zone). Cayenne learns very quickly and remem-bers new words (or gestures) for items and actions. Indeed, trainers face theproblem of convincing their dogs that some of the item and action names theylearned aren’t what their people meant for them to learn! Discriminations seemharder to unlearn than to learn.44.Marc D. Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch, “TheFaculty of Language: What Is It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science(November , ): –, . The orthodox—and carefully sup-ported—position among linguists can be found in Stephen R. Anderson, DoctorDoolittle’s Delusion: Animals and the Uniqueness of Human Language(New Haven,Conn.: Yale University Press, ). For further arguments against their critics,see W. Tecumesh Fitch, Marc D. Hauser, and Noam Chomsky, “The Evolutionof the Language Faculty: Clariﬁcation and Implications,” Cognition, no. 372dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




(September ): –. The work nurtures interdisciplinary cooperationamong evolutionary biologists, anthropologists, psychologists, and neuroscien-tists. The authors argue that a distinction should be made between functionallanguage in the broad sense (FLB) and language in the narrow sense (FLN).FLB is composed of many interacting subsystems (sensorimotor and computa-tional–intentional) that do not necessarily evolve as a unit. (I would add theneed to look at aﬀectional–semiotic–cognitive subsystems.) The only uniquelyhuman component of the language faculty (FLN) is recursion, which is “thecapacity to generate an inﬁnite range of expressions from a ﬁnite set of elements.”This potentially inﬁnite expressive power of language is also called the propertyof “discrete inﬁnity,” the power exercised by humans to “recombine meaningfulunits into an inﬁnite variety of larger structures, each diﬀering systematically inmeaning” (Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch, “The Faculty of Language,” ). Thisis much more than just combining words. But even the kind of computationaluniqueness required by FLN becomes subject in a new way to comparative stud-ies; and the authors insist that uniqueness must be a testable hypothesis, not anassumption rooted in premises of human exceptionalism. In addition, the authorsargue that such powerful capacities might well have evolved in domains otherthan communication (such as territory mapping, spatial navigation, and forag-ing) and then been hijacked for communication in ways uncoupled from tightconstraints of function. Language (FLN) may not have come about because itdid anything especially useful at ﬁrst. Language (FLN) may have come intobeing because it could; and then it got very useful indeed, altogether selectivelyadvantageous, for better and for worse for the planet. The opportunism of evo-lution is a great boon to the nonteleological thinking of the posthumanities.In addition, once made a seriously testable hypothesis, even FLN is taking hitson the uniqueness of recursion and discrete inﬁnity. It looks like European star-lings, if not primate inhabitants of the Bush Whitehouse, “accurately recognizeacoustic patterns deﬁned by recursive, self-embedding, context-free grammar.They are also able to classify new patterns deﬁned by the grammar and reliablyexclude agrammatical patterns.” Timothy Gentner, Kimberly Fenn, Daniel Mar-goliash, and Howard Nusbaum, “Recursive Syntactic Pattern Learning by Song-birds,” Nature(April , ): –, .45.Evolutionary zoologists have hardly ever operated with a single axisof biobehavioral diﬀerence among animals, no matter what they thought aboutwhere humans ﬁt in, but they have not been especially helpful either on ques-tions of language and consciousness, until recent interdisciplines reshaped thetopography.NOTES TO CHAPTER 8d373




46.Coren, How Dogs Think,.47.Marc Hauser, Wild Minds: What Animals Really Think(New York:Owl Books, ) is a good place to start. This Harvard psychologist and neuro -scientist (coauthor with Chomsky, above) argues that organisms possess hetero-geneous sets of mental tools, complexly and dynamically put together fromgenetic, developmental, and learning interactions throughout lives, not unitaryinteriors that one either has or does not have. For an even more generous view ofanimals’ varied mental and emotional lives, but one similarly insistent on animals’diﬀerences and immense variety and one rooted in evolutionary behavioral sci-ences, see Marc Bekoﬀ, Minding Animals: Awareness, Emotions, and Heart(Oxford:Oxford University Press, ). For Bekoﬀ, animals are other (nonanthropo-morphic) persons, not unlike Barbara Noske’s “other worlds” (Noske, BeyondBoundaries,xiii). The online bibliography of the Centre for Social Learning andCognitive Evolution at the University of St. Andrews, in Scotland, is a goodplace to ﬁnd references to recent work from one very active research institution.48.Smuts, “Encounters with Animal Minds,” .49.Gregory Bateson, “Metalogue: About Games and Being Serious,” inSteps to an Ecology of Mind,–. (Further references to this chapter of Bate-son’s book are in parentheses in the text.) I am indebted to conversations withKatie King about Bateson, and especially about the metalogues. Bateson was oneof King’s undergraduate teachers in the s at UC Santa Cruz and has beenan interlocutor in her transdisciplinary feminist theory ever since. See King, Net-worked Reenactments,under review; and www.womensstudies.umd.edu/wmstfac/kking/ (accessed May , ).50.Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind,.51.Ibid., .52.Ibid., . Exploring the shared dynamics of world building but moreinterested than I am in this chapter in how communication about somethingotherthan relationships emerges, Cary Wolfe also cites this passage from Bate-son in “In the Shadow of Wittgenstein’s Lion,” . Here, I am more interested inhow coshaping happens without language in the linguist’s sense of FLN or evenin Bateson’s sense of “how to be speciﬁc about something other than relation-ship” (Steps to an Ecology of Mind,; “In the Shadow of Wittgenstein’s Lion,”). Thus, I focus on how we—dogs and people—pay attention to each otherand thereby make something new in the world happen. I call that play, invention,and proposition.53.For another wise person (despite his restricting himself to the study ofhuman beings) who understood how play makes life worth living or, maybe374dNOTES TO CHAPTER 8




better, how play makes living creatively possible, see D. W. Winnicott, Playingand Reality(London: Tavistock, ). Thanks to Sheila Namir for the referenceand helpful conversations about play.54.Marc Bekoﬀand J. A. Byers, “A Critical Reanalysis of the Ontogeny ofMammalian Social and Locomotor Play: An Ethological Hornet’s Nest,” inBehavioural Development: The Bielefeld Interdisciplinary Project,ed. K. Immel-mann, G. W. Barlow, L. Petrinovich, and M. Main (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-versity Press, ), –. See also Marc Bekoﬀand J. A. Byers, eds., AnimalPlay: Evolutionary, Comparative, and Ecological Approaches(New York: Cam-bridge University Press, ).55.For over more than two decades, Bekoﬀhas led the way in payingattention to the emotional aspects of cognition and behavior, including play. SeeMarc M. Bekoﬀ, The Emotional Lives of Animals: A Leading Scientist ExploresAnimal Joy, Sorrow, and Empathy and Why They Matter(Novato, Calif.: NewWorld Library, ). As he told me in an e-mail dated August , , “I knowjoy is the key—just did not include it in .” At that time, he probably couldnot have gotten a scientiﬁc paper published that took animal joy seriously. Bar-bara Smuts was roundly criticized in some primate studies circles when she pub-lished a book titled Sex and Friendship in Baboons(New York: Aldine, ), andprimatologist Shirley Strum told me similar stories about severity in publishingstandards for using terms such as friendshipeven for nonhuman primates (muchless dogs or rats), despite the prevalence of such language in the ordinary idiomamong researchers outside the printed word. See Strum, Almost Human.This isthe same period of time when it seemed perfectly scientiﬁc to many to use termssuch as rapein sober, equation-ﬁlled papers to designate forced sex among non-human primates and birds. When Jeanne Altmann was the American editor ofthe prestigious journal Animal Behaviourfrom to , she negotiatedﬁercely with authors about whether such terms as rapeactually describe whatthe animals are doing. I think that her authoritative, gatekeeping attention toprecise description and scientiﬁcally defensible sampling techniques in primateﬁeld studies is part of the background for beginning to allow terms like friend-shipand to test more carefully terms that sound more scientiﬁc (aggression) forthe invisible work they actually do to shape what scientists know how to see. Thepoint is not that rape or aggression does not happen among animals—far fromit. The point is to pay comparable attention to and have testable hypotheses forthe full spectrum. Belief that one is protected from anthropomorphism by usinga term that is already considered technical would be laughable if it were not sodamaging to science. Careful practice of therio-anthropo-morphisms can lead toNOTES TO CHAPTER 8d375




much sounder scientiﬁc investigation than belief that some idioms are free ofﬁguration and others are polluted with culture. See Haraway, Primate Visions,especially –, –, –n. For a unique collaborative explorationof the coshaping of the thing called “science and society” by ﬁeld and lab pri-mate biologists, cultural studies scholars, feminist theorists, and science studiesscholars (partly overlapping categories), see Strum and Fedigan, eds., PrimateEncounters.56.Wedde, “Walking the Dog,” .57.Marc Bekoﬀ, “Wild Justice and Fair Play: Cooperation, Forgiveness,and Morality in Animals,” Biology and Philosophy(): –.58.Writer Ian Wedde’s “therianthropism” joins science ﬁction studies andhuman-animal studies scholar Istvan Csicsery-Ronay’s proposal for an interna-tional online journal hosted at DePauw University, for which I oﬀered and heaccepted the name Humanimaliato signal the reciprocal inductions in play in theemerging interdisciplines of human and nonhuman animal studies, as well as inthe historically situated ﬂeshly encounters of people and other animals.59.Isabelle Stengers, “Whitehead’s Account of the Sixth Day,” paperdelivered at the Stanford University Whitehead Symposium, April , , .Further references to this paper will occur parenthetically in the main text. Myarguments to follow grow from conversations with Stengers and from “TheSixth Day and the Problem of Human Exceptionalism,” which is my commenton Stengers’s paper, Stanford University Whitehead Symposium, April , .See also Stengers, Penser avec Whitehead.60.Whitehead, Process and Reality,.9. CRITTERCAMNote on second epigraph: Tracking the material–semiotic action of multipleluminous refractive bends, Hayward further writes, “I am concerned with howaquatic imaging and hydro-optics cause optics and haptics to slide into eachother.” Eva Shawn Hayward, “Envisioning Invertebrates: Immersion, Inhabita-tion, and Intimacy as Modes of Encounter in Marine TechnoArt,” qualifyingessay, History of Consciousness Department, University of California at SantaCruz, December .Note on third epigraph: Text from a brochure announcing theNational Geographic Society’s television series Crittercam,made up of thirteenhalf-hour episodes. Twelve featured marine critters, and one tied its cameras toAfrican lions, fruit of a three-year eﬀort to develop Crittercams for land-based376dNOTES TO CHAPTER 9




studies as well as marine excursions. In this chapter, I will not discuss the inter-esting land Crittercams, attached so far, predictably, to lions, tigers, and bears.Crittercam research and the TV series are partly funded by the National ScienceFoundation, described on-screen as “America’s investment in the future.” Thepromissory, futuristic, frontier orientations of the show are never out of frame onCrittercam;that is the nature of life in the era of Biocapital.Also predictable, as well as lamentably outside the scope of this chapter,are the miniature TV cameras with transmitters that are attached these days tothe foreheads of Northumbrian police dogs. The cameras have infrared lights forﬁlming in dark conditions. Trained to assist during armed sieges and to searchsites and relay video information back to human oﬃcers, the dogs also delivermobile phones at the door of premises under siege to facilitate negotiations. See“Dog Cameras to Combat Gun Crime,” BBC News, U.K. Division, December ,, http://news.bbc.co.uk//hi/england/.stm (accessed May , ).Working security camdogs are joined by their pet cousins, who can be ﬁtted witha Japanese-designed miniature digital camera worn around the neck so that thedoting human can “ﬁnally get a dog’s viewon life” (www.pamperedpuppy.com/puppytrends/archives///digital_dog_cam.php, accessed May , ).1.Ihde, Bodies in Technology,.2.Bruno Latour, “From Realpolitikto Dingpolitik:An Introduction toMaking Things Public,” in Making Things Public,ed. Latour and Weibel. Avail-able at www.bruno-latour.fr/articles/article/-dingpolitik.html (accessed May, ).3.Beginning with National Geographic Exploreron TBS in , as well asGreat White Sharkin on NBC, Crittercam images were seen on TV beforethe series.4.Unless otherwise stated, quotations and descriptions throughout thischapter come from various parts of www.nationalgeographic.com/crittercam.5.Adapted from http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/site/accounts/information/Remora_remora.html (accessed May , ), the technical speci-ﬁcations for a remora follow: Remora remorais a short, thickset sucking ﬁsh withtwenty-eight to thirty-seven long slender gillrakers, twenty-one to twenty-sevendorsal ﬁn rays, twenty to twenty-four anal ﬁn rays, and twenty-ﬁve to thirty-twopectoral ﬁn rays. The remora has no swim bladder and uses a sucking disk onthe top of its head to obtain rides from other animals, such as large sharks andsea turtles. The remora grows to about eighteen inches. Near nothing is knownabout the remora’s breeding habits or larval development. The remora is mostoften found oﬀshore in the warmer parts of all oceans attached to sharks andNOTES TO CHAPTER 9d377




other marine ﬁshes and mammals. The remora are considered to have a com-mensal relationship with their host, since they do not hurt the host and are justalong for the ride. The remora is of unique value to humans. The ﬁsh itself is notgenerally eaten but is instead used as a means of catching large ﬁsh and sea tur-tles. Fishermen in countries around the world use them by attaching a line totheir tails and then releasing them. The remora will then swim oﬀand attachitself to a large ﬁsh or turtle, which can then be pulled in by a careful ﬁsherman.The remora is not held in high esteem as a food ﬁsh, although the AustralianAborigines are said to eat them after using them on ﬁshing trips. On the otherhand, Aborigines from the West Indies never ate their “hunting ﬁsh” and insteadsang songs of praise and reverence to them. The ancient Greeks and Romans hadwritten widely about remoras and had ascribed to them many magical powerssuch as the ability to cause an abortion if handled in a certain way. Shamans inMadagascar to this day attach portions of the remora’s suction disk to the necksof wives to assure faithfulness in their husbands’ absence. Following the remoras,Greg Marshall was in good company.6.I take the term reality enginesfrom “The Reality Eﬀect of Technosci -ence,” Julian Bleecker’s PhD dissertation on computer graphics engineeringand semiotics and the labor it takes to build and sustain speciﬁc material reali-ties (History of Consciousness Department, University of California at SantaCruz). In this chapter, I use a compound optical device, made up of lenses froma colleague, Don Ihde, and two of my graduate students from diﬀerent cohorts,Julian Bleecker and Eva Shawn Hayward.7.See Haraway, The Companion Species Manifesto.8.An area of Aboriginal presence from ,b.c.e.to now, Shark Bayhas been a World Heritage Site since . Tourism, endangered species, archae-ology sites, indigenous history, colonial ﬁrst-contact stories and white settlement,an abandoned whaling station, abandoned isolation hospitals for Aboriginalswith venereal disease and leprosy, today’s native title struggles, natural scientiﬁcresearch, a modern scallop ﬁshery, salt ponds: it’s all there, as expected, pro-viding a complex ecology for National Geographic’s Crittercam species assem-blages. See www.unep-wcmc.org/sites/wh/sharkbay.html. Aboriginal people areinvolved in cultural revival, political contestation, and site management. On behalfof Malgana Shark Bay people, the Yamatji Marlpa Barna Baba Maaja AboriginalCorporation ﬁled claims in with the National Native Title Tribunal. Seewww.nntt.gov.au/applications/claimant/WC_.html. Malgana and NgandaAboriginal peoples are central to the history of Shark Bay. Records of Aborigi-nal history in Western Australia, including Shark Bay, can be tracked through378dNOTES TO CHAPTER 9




www.sro.wa.gov.au/collection/aboriginalrecords.asp. (All Web sites accessedMay , .)9.Hayward, “Inhabited Light: Refracting The Love Life of the Octopus,”section in Hayward, “Envisioning Invertebrates.”10.In the wake of the Exxon Valdezmega–oil spill in Prince Wil -liam Sound, the biologically, culturally, and economically crucial Bristol Bay oﬀsouthwest Alaska was put oﬀlimits to oil drilling, ﬁrst by Congress and then byBill Clinton’s presidential order. Congress lifted its ban on Bristol Baydrilling in . George W. Bush rescinded the executive order in January .See www.nytimes.com////washington/drill.html (accessed May ,). All ﬁve species of Paciﬁc salmon spawn in rivers emptying into BristolBay. The area supplies percent of the seafood consumed in the United States.Vulnerable populations of North Paciﬁc right whales, Steller’s sea lions, andmany other species, as well as ﬁsheries and tourism, are part of the picture.In the commercial ﬁshing industry was economically depressed, openingthe door to renewed action by big oil. Native Alaskan ﬁsheries and proteinsources in the region are especially at risk to oil and gas ecological disasters. Localand translocal environmental organizations are major players. Formed under theAlaska Native Claims Settlement Act of December , , the Bristol BayNative Corporation, representing Aleut, Athabascan, and Eskimo peoples, is animportant actor in the region as well. See www.bbnc.net/.11.For the results of the Crittercamteam–whale biologist collaboration,see Fred Sharpe, Michael Heithaus, Lawrence Dill, Birgit Buhleier, GregoryMarshall, and Pieter Folkiens, “Variability in Foraging Tactics and EstimatedPrey Intake by Socially Foraging Humpback Whales in Chatham Strait, Alaska,”paper presented at the th Biennial Conference on the Biology of MarineMammals, Greensboro, N.C., .12.Ihde, Bodies in Technology,.13.Don Ihde, “If Phenomenology Is an Albatross, Is Post-phenomenologyPossible?” in Chasing Technoscience,ed. Don Ihde and Evan Selinger (Bloom ing -ton: Indiana University Press, ), –. As Ihde puts it, “An asymmetricalbut post-phenomenological relativitygets its ‘ontology’ from the interrelationshipof human and non-human” ().10. CHICKENTranslation note on epigraph: “I said: Cock-a-doodle-do.” “The strutting roostercalls. Now comes the farmer.” From Grunt,Pigorian Chant from Snouto DomoinkoNOTES TO CHAPTER 10d379




de Silo, performed by the Ad Hoc Camerata, discovered, translated, notated, andilluminated by Sandra Boynton (New York: Workman Publishing, ), .1.For a serious liberal arts education, read Page Smith and CharlesDaniel, The Chicken Book(Athens: University of Georgia Press, ; original,Boston: Little Brown, ). Historian Smith and biologist Daniel collaboratedat the University of California Santa Cruz in the s, ﬁrst, to teach an under-graduate seminar and, then, with their students’ research aiding them, to writethis unique chicken book, including cultural, historical, religious, biological,agricultural, political, economic, communitarian, and epistemological points ofview. Beginning teaching at UCSC in , I inherited the cat’s cradle game ofchicken that Smith and Daniel played with their students and colleagues.2.An earlier version of this chapter was published in B. Eekelen, J. Gon-zalez, B. Stötzer, and A. Tsing, eds., Shock and Awe: War on Words(Santa Cruz:New Paciﬁc Press, ), –. A group of friends and student and faculty col-leagues at UCSC and beyond collaborated on that little book to try to repositionforces in the war on words launched in the Bush Whitehouse after /. I chosethe letter Cto see how the world looked from the point of view of Chicken.Susan Squier, a professor at Pennsylvania State University, is doing wonderfulresearch that links biomedical, biological, literary, feminist theoretical, and sci-ence studies dimensions of chicken–human relations. See Susan Squier, “ChickenAuguries,” Conﬁgurations,in press for , and keep an eye out for her book inprogress, Poultry Science, Chicken Culture: Practicing AgriCultural Studies.Locatedat Te Whare Wananga o Waitaha/University of Canterbury, New Zealand,Annie Potts is writing Chickenfor the unique Reaktion Books animal seriesunder the general editorship of Jonathan Burt. Potts cofounded Animal StudiesAotearoa.3.LGBT: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, not to be confused withBLT (bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich). One is a proper ﬂeshly cultural andpolitical formation. The other is too, if you consider the knots of multispeciesworld making tied up in lettuce, bacon, tomatoes, wheat, yeast, and sugar, as wellas the eggs, oil, salt, and citrus juice in mayonnaise. Chicken is no stranger toLGBT or BLT.4.Ever vigilant—thank all the earth deities—the animal rescue apparatusof modern times has not neglected spent hens, even if there was never a taskmore ﬁtting for Sisyphus. For a moving story of one rescued spent hen, wholived out her last days in enriched farmyard retirement learning how to be areal chicken, complete with all the elaborate behavior proper to her kind thatbattery-cage existence had kept her from acquiring, see Patrice Jones, “Funny380dNOTES TO CHAPTER 10




Girl: Fanny and Her Friends,” Best Friends (September/October ): –.The chicken and egg industry in Petaluma in turned spent hens into com-post, because the market for animal food and other uses of the tough chickenmeat no longer covers the costs of slaughter and processing. Some of the henshave survived gassing with carbon dioxide and burial in the compost piles tostagger into the politics and newspapers of Sonoma County.5.Figures are from United Poultry Concerns, www.upc-online.org/ (ac -cessed May , ). See also en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Poultry_Concerns.6.In Anthropology (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming),Michael Fischer taught me that Michel Serres’s notion of contract is rooted inthe original Latin meaning, con-trahere,or gathering together, as in tighteningthe rigging of a sailboat. The ropes have to be in reciprocal adjustment forsmooth functioning with the wind. Fischer cites the discussion of this meaningof contract in Kerry Whiteside, Divided Natures: French Contributions to PoliticalEcology(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, ). That meaning of contract theorywould be quite useful in the naturecultures I imagine to be still possible.7.Myostatin regulates muscle development, and its gene is under intensescrutiny. Commercial interest relates to the world’s number-one genetic disease(muscular dystrophies), wasting disorders (including aging and AIDS-relatedmuscle loss), space ﬂight–induced muscle atrophy, sports (watch out, steroidpurveyors!), and even faster growing, bigger chicken muscles. See G. N. Scheuer-mann, S. F. Bilgili, S. Tuzun, and D. R. Mulvaney, “Comparison of ChickenGenotypes: Myoﬁber Number in Pectoralis Muscle and Myostatin Ontogeny,”Poultry Science, no. (): –.8.For a hint of the importance of chickens (eggs and broilers) in theeconomic history of animal–industrial standardization, see Glenn E. Bugos,“Intellectual Property Protection in the American Chicken-Breeding Industry,”Business History Review(Spring ): –; Roger Horowitz, “Makingthe Chicken of Tomorrow: Reworking Poultry as Commodities and as Crea-tures, –,” inIndustrializing Organisms,ed. S. Schrepfer and P. Scranton(New York: Routledge, ), –.9.I believe that McDonald’s was forced to its still shockingly inadequateradical position on living quarters for hens by the much reviled animal rightsmovement. McDonald’s new animal care standards for its suppliers went muchfurther than regulations for poultry legally required. The corporation down-played the role that People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)and the Animal Liberation Front played in its change of heart, but it is hard todeny that their McCruelty to Go campaign attracted the attention of corporateNOTES TO CHAPTER 10d381




headquarters. Image control, if not insight into bird lives, is big business. SeeRod Smith, Feedstuﬀs staﬀeditor, “McDonald’s Animal Care Guidelines De -scribed as ‘Aggressive,’ Realistic,” Factory Farming.com: Current Issues,May ,, www.factoryfarming.com/mcdonalds.htm. What counts as radical andwhat as normal is very much at stake in animal–human knots. In reference toslaughter laws, “humane” deserves scare quotes, not only because the laws (muchless their application) are too often not humane by any measure, but more fun-damentally because the word foregrounds the inappropriate humanist standardapplied to killing animals. I think killing deserves deeper thinking if humanbeings’ eating chickens and other animals is to be in the knot of ﬂourishingmultispecies living—if that remains possible in the “developed” and globalizedneoliberal world as it has become. In , only California, Utah, and NorthDakota had laws regulating cruelty in slaughtering birds, and regulating crueltyis not an adequate practice. In that same year, PETA—not my favorite group, tosay the least, but not one I can walk totally away from either—obtained under-ground video footage of extreme overt cruelty (workers stomping on live chick-ens and hurling them into walls) in a poultry-packaging plant in West Virginia,which produces for Kentucky Fried Chicken. See www.peta.org/feat/mooreﬁeld/(accessed May , ). These incidents gained considerable attention from thenational mainstream media. The damaged and exploited human workers andthe brutalized birds cohabit a normal hell that Marx and Engels knew howto describe for factory workers in Manchester in the nineteenth century. Thetwenty-ﬁrst century has a full panoply of such proﬁt-maximizing and fantasy-driven worlds, within which sentience is little protection, no matter the species,and a limbic system gets one nowhere at all. The meaningful body becomes mereﬂesh and so is made killable in the logic of sacriﬁce. See the discussion of Der-rida on that powerful logic in chapter , “Sharing Suﬀering”; and Giorgio Agam-ben, Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life,trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen(Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, ). See also Charlie LeDuﬀ, “Ata Slaughterhouse: Some Things Never Die,” in Zoontologies,ed. Wolfe, –.10.Petaluma Farms near me in California is one source for “extra-nutritious DHA Omega-” (claim on the egg carton) from eggs laid by chickensraised without cages and eating an organic vegetarian diet. The label goes fur-ther, calling the operation a “wild hen farm.” Called “specialty eggs” in the indus-try, designer eggs accounted for about percent of U.S. egg sales in . There’slots of room for growth. In , U.S. Americans consumed .billion eggs,that is, per person. I think operations such as Petaluma Farms deserve mysupport, but I do experience indigestion at the class and science semiotics (and382dNOTES TO CHAPTER 10




realities) of niche marketing. See Carol Ness, “The New Egg,” April , ,www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?ﬁle=/chronicle/archive////FDGNMVFB.DTL. Thanks to Dawn Coppin for this information. For aFlorida agricultural extension service survey of designer eggs available around, see http://edis.ifas.uﬂ.edu/PS(accessed May , ).11.Sarah Franklin, “Stem Cells R Us,” in Global Assemblages,ed. A. Ongand S. Collier (London: Blackwell, ), –; Margaret Atwood, Oryx andCrake(Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, ). Chicken without chickensis not merely a novelist’s speculative ﬁction. For a marvelous reading of Oryxand Crakeat the intersection of feminism, philosophy, and biology, see TraciWarkentin, “Dis/integrating Animals: Ethical Dimensions of the Genetic Engi-neering of Animals for Human Consumption,” AI and Society(): –. I would disagree with much of Warkentin’s reading of molecular biology asnecessarily mechanistic reductionism, but I share her critique of mechanomor-phism in vast regions of agribusiness practices, including in what used to becalled “pure research.” Consider also the pork tissue culture system under scien-tiﬁc development at the University of Utrecht in the labs of Henk Haagsman,using pig stem cells, naturally. See Marianne Heselmans, “Cultivated Meat,”www.new-harvest.org/article.htm (accessed May , ). In ,the Dutch government funded the project with two million Euros. Tissue Gen-esis in Hawaii is another player. Success, deﬁned as developing something edibleenough and cheap enough for the market, in about ﬁve years is their predic-tion. See Lakshmi Sandhana, “Test Tube Meat Nears Dinner Table,” June, , www.wired.com/news/technology/,-.html?tw=rss.technology.Animals have long been troped as “bioreactors” in technoscientiﬁc advertisingfor drug and agribusiness research. Transgenics and stem cell technologies haveincreased this kind of ﬁguration markedly. Current research is another instanceof the implosion of trope and ﬂesh, as bioreactors stand in for animals “literally.”This kind of literalization is one of the things I mean by “material–semiotic,”trope and ﬂesh always cohabiting, always co-constituting. For astute ethno-graphic analysis, see Karen-Sue Taussig, “Bovine Abominations: Genetic Cul-ture and Politics in the Netherlands,” Cultural Anthropology, no. ():–.12.Citing ﬁnancial constraints, Indonesia had not conducted mass cullingin response to its human deaths from bird ﬂu, and probably as a result, thiscountry’s total number of recorded human deaths by mid-had surpassedthat of Vietnam, which had both culled and vaccinated birds aggressively. Massculling is immensely unpopular and a political risk, but so is a human pandemic.NOTES TO CHAPTER 10d383




Observers estimated that about .million birds died naturally of bird ﬂu inIndonesia between and . See www.planetark.com/dailynewsstory.cfm/newsid//story.htm (accessed May , ). Mass culls have been con-ducted in many countries, from Canada to Turkey to Egypt to India, that last ofwhich killed about seven hundred thousand birds in February in responseto an outbreak among poultry in Maharashtra. See http://edition.cnn.com//health/conditions///birdﬂu.asia.wrap/index.html (accessed May, ).13.See Chris Wilbert, “Proﬁt, Plague, and Poultry: The Intra-activeWorlds of Highly Pathogenic Avian Flu,” Radical Philosophy(Septem-ber/October ), www.radicalphilosophy.com/default.asp?channel_id=&editorial_id=. Wilbert writes, “In we awoke, in Europe at least, tothe odd situation in which twitchers—obsessive birdwatchers who spend muchof their leisure time on the far-ﬂung edges of countries—are being reinvented asthe eyes and ears of the state, helping warn of new border incursions. Theseincursions are posited as taking an avian form that may bring with it very unwel-come pathogens. Everyday avian observations and knowledges of migratoryroutes are being reinvented as a kind of border patrol, a ﬁrst line of veterinarysurveillance.”14.See http://news.bbc.co.uk//hi/world/africa/.stm; and www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=&SelectRegion=West_Africa&SelectCountry=nigeria (both Web sites accessed May , ).15.A spokesperson for Birdlife International thinks that the chicken tradehas made this fowl the most migratory avian on the planet. Donald McNeil,“From the Chickens’ Perspective, the Sky Really Is Falling,” New York Times,March , , D. Anna Tsing, “Figures of Capitalist Globalization: FirmModels and Chain Links,” paper presented at the University of Minnesota for“Markets in Time” study group, , explores the kin relations between legaland illegal trade, resource extraction, and manufacturing that are both necessaryto global capitalism and also organic to hyperexploitation of people and otherspecies. As Marx understood, how else can accumulation be realized? Theremight actually be a good answer to that question, and it will have transspeciﬁc,posthumanist justice at its heart.16.See Elizabeth Rosenthal, “Bird Flu Virus May Be Spread by Smug-gling,” New York Times,April , , A, A.17.Steven Lee Myers, “Ukraine Plugging a Porous Border: Eﬀorts Focuson Moldavan Region’s Murky Economy,” International Herald Tribune,May ,, .384dNOTES TO CHAPTER 10




18.Thorleif Schjelderup-Ebbe, “Social Behavior in Birds,” in Handbookof Social Psychology,ed. Carl Murchison (Worcester, Mass.: Clark UniversityPress, ).19.Sue Fishkoﬀ, “When Left-Wingers and Chicken Wings PopulatedPeta luma,” Jerusalem Post Service,Friday May , , www.jewishsf.com/content/--/module/displaystory/story_id//edition_id//format/html/displaystory.html. A radio series, Comrades and Chicken Ranchers(www.jewishsf.com/content/--/module/displaystory/story_id//edition_id//format/html/displaystory.html, accessed May , ), and a televisiondocumentary, A Home on the Range(www.jewishchickenranchers.com/get/,accessed May , ), tell the story.20.Julie Phillips, James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon(New York: St. Martin’s Press, ), . Thanks to Katie King for pointing meto Tiptree’s life in chickens and the tie with scientiﬁc agrarian nation building forIsrael. On the doleful history of scientiﬁc chicken farming, see Smith and Daniel,The Chicken Book,–. On the animal–industrial complex, see Noske,Beyond Boundaries,–. In ironic justice, in the early twenty-ﬁrst century theRutgers University School of Law is home to the Animal Rights Law Center.21.Phillips, James Tiptree, Jr.,.22.A kindly scientist’s seeding a global pandemic from an airplane with avirus to exterminate the human species was the plot of Tiptree’s “The Last Flightof Dr. Ain,” her breakthrough story into science ﬁction stardom, published inin Galaxy.Of course, my allegorical mind races to the bird ﬂu virus. “TheLast Flight of Dr. Ain” and many of my other favorite stories are collected inJames Tiptree Jr.: Warm Worlds and Otherwise(New York: Ballantine, );Star Songs of an Old Primate(New York: Ballantine, ); and Out of the Every-where(New York: Ballantine, ). As Racoona Sheldon, Tiptree published“Morality Meat,” dealing with unfree pregnancy, a right-to-life adoption center,defective babies, and a new and very suspicious kind of meat in a nation whoseentire meat industry, including chickens, had been wiped out by drought andgrain diseases, in Despatches from the Frontiers of the Human Mind,ed. Jen Greenand Sarah Lefanu (London: Women’s Press, ), –.23.Begin with www.rbst.org.uk/ and click to a large knot of promisinglyimpure work to put agricultural multispecies ﬂourishing into action.24.The eighteenth-century philosophe Denis Diderot precedes us inunderstanding what watching a fertile egg can do to convince us that Westernphilosophy has never really been all that Western, a point Isabelle Stengersmakes forcefully. In Diderot’s D’Alembert’s Dream,the philosopher says to hisNOTES TO CHAPTER 10d385




interlocutor, “You see this egg? That’s what enables us to overturn all the schoolsof theology and all temples on the earth.” Denis Diderot, “A Conversationbetween d’Alembert and Diderot,” from D’Alembert’s Dream(Le rêve d’Alembert),, trans. Ian Johnston, Malaspina University-College, Nanaimo, B.C., avail-able online at www.mala.bc.ca/~Johnstoi/diderot/conversation.htm (accessedMay , ). Isabelle Stengers, Power and Invention: Situating Science,trans.Paul Bains (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, ), –. Thanksto Stengers for pointing me to Diderot’s appreciation of the egg.11. BECOMING COMPANION SPECIES IN TECHNOCULTURE1.Jan-Kyrre Berg Olsen and Evan Selinger, eds., Philosophy of Technology(n.p.: Automatic Press/VIP, December ). For sample replies from partici-pants, see www.philosophytechnology.com/.12. PARTING BITES1.The northern hairy-nosed wombat can be tracked through the Wom-bat Information Center, www.wombania.com (accessed May , ); BIRD,the biodiversity information Web site, http://bird.net.au/bird/index.php?title=Yaminon (accessed May , ); and Tim Flannery and Paula Kendall, Aus-tralia’s Vanishing Mammals(Sydney: R. D. Press, ).2.Everyone knows that termites need their cellulose-digesting symbionts,but fewer know that grass-eating wombats have specialized guts that are hometo their own species of cellulose-processing workers. See “Feeding Ecology andDiet,” www.answers.com/topic/wombat (accessed May , ).3.Working on the Queensland wombat for over ten years, Dr. AndreaTaylor of Monash University, in Melbourne, “has developed a low disturbancegenetic technique to census the wombat population. Wombat hair is collected onsticky tape strung across wombat burrows and DNA in the follicle is used toidentify the sex and the ‘owner’ of the hair” (www.yaminon.org/gallery.html,accessed December ). Living endangered means living in technoculture; it isa condition of ﬂourishing, or not, on earth now for most critters. See also AndreaTaylor, “Molecular Biology Meets Conservation Biology—Australian MammalCase Studies,” Australian Frontiers of Science,, www.science.org.au/events/frontiers/Taylor.htm (accessed May , ).4.Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, “The Beast with Five Genomes,”Natural History Magazine,June , online at www.naturalhistorymag.com//_feature.html.386dNOTES TO CHAPTER 12




5.Hayward, “Envisioning Invertebrates.”6.To think about other practices of reckoning, see the essential text HelenVerran, Science and an African Logic(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,). Not coincidentally, Melbourne-based Verran writes about Aboriginallandholding, management practices, mathematics, and meanings of countryamong the Wik and the Yolngu. For example, see Helen Verran, “Re-imaginingLand Title in Australia,” Postcolonial Studies(): –. Verran workswith Indigenous Knowledge and Resource Management in the Northern Terri-tory (www.cdu.edu.au/centres/ik), and she writes about how Aboriginal knowl-edge traditions can contribute to “doing” the nature of Australia.7.Patricia Piccinini, In Another Life,published on the occasion of theexhibition at the City Gallery Wellington, February –June , (Welling-ton, Aotearoa New Zealand: City Gallery, ). I draw from Piccinini’s ownessay, “In Another Life,” –, as well as from artist and writer Stella Brennan’sintroduction of Piccinini, “Border Patrol,” –. See also Patricia Piccinini’s Website (www.patriciapiccinini.net/) for more drawings of human babies meeting herfabulated companion species from the series she called Nature’s Little Helpersand her short essay “About These Drawings . . .” Thanks to Lindsay Kelley forintroducing me to Piccinini’s work in my graduate seminar on animal studiesand science studies in and to April Henderson for sending me In AnotherLifein late . Jim Cliﬀord is Henderson’s PhD dissertation adviser in theHistory of Consciousness Department, and I like to think that the “James” sittingface-to-face with the surrogate for the wombat is the young Cliﬀord making oneof his ﬁrst postcolonial critter contacts in preparation for his wonderful writingabout Paciﬁc islanders’ syncretic and heterogeneous theory, culture, and politics.8.Telling a powerful story knotted through the transatlantic world ratherthan through Australia and the trans-Paciﬁc, Sidney Mintz explores sugar’s sym-biogenetic naturecultures in Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in ModernHistory(New York: Penguin, ). Commodities, labor, slavery, spice, medicine,luxury, and much more are all there, but the humanist frame of Mintz’s anthro-pology makes it harder to see all the other organisms (and other nonhumans)actively involved.9.Consider the shaping of “new natures,” complete with the assemblagesof mixed native and introduced species of every place on earth by the twenty-ﬁrstcentury, perhaps especially in Australia—where pure categories of wild, domes-tic, endemic, or exotic cannot do justice to an environmentalism committedsimultaneously to multispecies coﬂourishing, heterogeneous collective memory,and complex histories. Serious projects are required to build and rebuild livableNOTES TO CHAPTER 12d387




naturecultures into the future. Origins are not accessible even in principle. Seethe controversial work by the Australian Tim Low: Feral Future: The UntoldStory of Australia’s Exotic Invaders(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, )and The New Nature: Winners and Losers in Wild Australia(Sydney, Australia:Penguin, ). Many endangered endemics have come to depend on introducedspecies for resources critical to eating and reproducing, which makes “restora-tion” and “preservation” a bit touchy. For integration of Low’s approaches withscience studies, sociology, colonial and postcolonial cultural studies, and consid-erations of animal well-being from both ecological and rights perspectives, seeFranklin, Animal Nation;the kookaburra example is on .The anthropologist Deborah Bird Rose, Reports from a Wild Country(Sydney: University of New South Wales, ), writes about the woundedspace of Australian land and people and the deep need for recuperation and rec-onciliation in countermodern mode. Based on many years of work with Aborig-ines, especially in the Northern Territory, her perspective is rooted in relentlessmemory of the realities of mass killings and death in the white settler colony andits replacement ecologies. I ﬁnd Rose’s way of working fundamental for rebuild-ing a more livable world. Recognizing that approaches to current environmen-tal–ethical dilemmas must be complex and polyvalent, she also appreciatesmixed and heterogeneous naturecultures across times. Indeed, her work is allabout mutually interconnected webs of relationships that are always in motion.But she refuses to look away from the onrushing catastrophe embedded in pastand present human-made mass death that continues to sweep up critters ofevery category, human and nonhuman alike. See also Deborah Bird Rose, “WhatIf the Angel of History Were a Dog?” Cultural Studies Review, no. (March): –. There she tracks the ongoing death work in the poisoning of din-goes and wild dogs and hanging their corpses from trees as both a reality and aﬁgure of a world howling with grief in the notes of howling dingoes.Although they both depend on mixed-species assemblages, I think it issafe to say that Tim Low’s ”feral futures” have a diﬀerent resonance from the eco-logical ur-restoration discourses proper to reestablishing Pleistocene fauna andecosystems in North America. Still, something is compelling about “restoring”the grasslands of the western United States and the Great Plains by “transplant-ing” elephants and African lions. See Eric Jaﬀe, “Brave Old World: The Debateover Rewilding North America with Ancient Animals,” Science News(Novem-ber , ): –. This could put the chronologically parochial ﬁghts amongranchers, hunters, and environmentalists about repopulation of the land bynorthern gray wolves into perspective!388dNOTES TO CHAPTER 12




10.Franklin, Animal Nation,–.11.Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway,, .12.Donna Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question inFeminism as a Site of Discourse on the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” FeministStudies, no. (): –. I remember that feminist “standpoint the-ory” was not and is not about ﬁxed positions and identities but about the rela-tional work and play of intersectional feminist worlding, which my colleagueand friend Nancy Hartsock called feminist historical materialism. I attributeher insight to her love of horses along with her love—and close reading—ofMarx. Hartsock understands “becoming with” in order to “become worldly.” SeeSandra Harding, ed., The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader(New York: Rout-ledge, ).13.Katie King, my mentor for three decades in reading feminist scienceﬁction, wrote, “When I ﬁrst saw James (sitting),I thought it was an illustrationfor a cover for Suzette Hadin Elgin’s Native Tongue!” Indeed. The linguist Elgin’ssf novel (New York: DAW, ) is about twenty-third-century human women,living after the repeal of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitutionand in the grip of the Twenty-ﬁfth Amendment, which has rendered womenlegal minors. The women are linguists of the Lines, communications specialistswho mediate trade contacts between humans and aliens. Considered incapableof such things, in a special language they invented called Láadan, the womennourish plans for overthrowing the established disorder and building a newworld. Láadan would become a native language. For a description of the lan-guage and links, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C%Aadan. My paperback cover of Native Tonguehas a large green alien head peering benignly(?) at a diminutive blond human baby seated on a circular embroidery frame,with ranks of test tubes full of gestating embryos in the background. Indis-putably (how?) female, the scaly smiling maternal alien looms awfully close tothe child. Her head looks very much like a protist covered by spherical bacteria.Or like the reptilian snake head of Lord Valdemort in feminine drag in a HarryPotter movie. Joining the futuristic alien and the terran archaic is a staple tropein sf. The baby is gesturing with its left hand to its mouth—hungry? talking? Oris the baby the extraterrestrial lady’s lunch? Only the feral future will tell.14.For great pictures of this wombat species and information about theYaminon Defense Fund, see www.yaminon.org/ (accessed December ). TheWeb site looks like a one-person operation. I would not be surprised to ﬁnda story like C. A. Sharp’s if someone set out to track the examined lives ofthese wombats and their passionate people. The term wombatitself comes fromNOTES TO CHAPTER 12d389




the Eora Aboriginal community that lived around the area of modern Sydney(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wombat).15.Katie King, “Pastpresents: Knotted Histories under Globalization,” inThinking with Donna Haraway,ed. Ghamari-Tabrizi, in ms., . King’s book, Net-worked Reenactments: Histories under Globalization(under review), develops herinsight through examining reenactments on television (Highlander,Xena,Nova),in museums (the Smithsonian’s Science in American Life), and in scholarly his-tories (historiography of seventeenth-century Quaker women and the “scientiﬁcrevolution”). King is in alliance with Bruno Latour’s Parliament of Things,reworked to serve ﬂexible knowledges with feminist verve.16.Watch how my story works as reenactment. I have telescoped timesand details to tell a true fabulation. Pastpresents are crucial to doing this. Re-enactments are not empirically unaccountable, but they are not positivist recon-structions either. The evidence or facts for a story are always themselves caughtup in layered reenactments. Katie tells me Mischa might have described herselfas pagan, and both of them wore the names of anarchist and feminist in variousways over the years (but never as Identities), but many at the birth ceremonywould not have done so then or later. Cyberwitches populated the Santa CruzMountains a few years after the placenta feast. I regard the technofeminists andthe hippie home-birth community as kin, engaged in a kind of sf spiral dancewhen species meet.17.Derrida (with Jean-Luc Nancy), “‘Eating Well,’ or the Calculation ofthe Subject,” .18.Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway,.19.www.albionmonitor.com/--/ex-feralpigs.html (accessed May ,).20.Check out the California Department of Fish and Game paper onwild pig management, www.dfg.ca.gov/hunting/pig/index.htm (accessed May ,). Feral pigs in California date from Spanish mission times. The pigs are aparticular environmental disaster in places such as the Santa Cruz Island Pre-serve, where the Nature Conservancy and the National Parks Service launcheda program in to eradicate them. Prohunt, Inc., from New Zealand washired to do the work. Are these antipodean hunters a guardian species like Pic-cinini’s surrogates? The pigs on the island laid waste to the vegetation crucial tocover for the island foxes. That drew golden eagles, who hunted the foxes to nearextinction. The eradication program includes relocating eagles to the mainlandand captive breeding and release of foxes. Native plant communities are alsoexpected to recover. See www.nature.org/wherewework/northamerica/states/390dNOTES TO CHAPTER 12




california/press/press_sci.html (accessed May , ). Prohunt, Inc.,established a subsidiary in Orange County, California, to operate more easily inthe United States. The company specializes in wild animal management for con-servation projects. Prohunt has supplied New Zealand goat-hunting dogs andexpertise for the Isabella goat eradication project in the Galápagos, written anungulate eradication plan for Cocos Island, Costa Rica, and provided adviceand expertise for the eradication of goats on Gaudalupe Island, Mexico. Seewww.prohunt.co.nz/aboutus.htm (accessed May , ). On pig eradication onSanta Cruz Island, see www.prohunt.co.nz/newsletter.htm (accessed May ,). The ecological damage from wild pigs on the California mainland is morecomplex but also substantial. Hunters are not always benign in this story, putmildly. Some “sportsmen” have been known to release piglets into areas not yetinhabited by pigs to increase their hunting base.21.For crucial knowledge, feeling, and argument, see Carol Adams, “AnAnimal Manifesto: Gender, Identity, and Vegan–Feminism in the Twenty-ﬁrstCentury,” Parallax, no. (): –. She argues, “Haraway protectsthe dominance that ontologizes animals as edible just as the sheepdogs she cel-ebrates protect the ontologized ‘livestock’” (). I hope I have met Adams inthis book, not convinced her, but respected her crucial truths as well as my ownin a nonrelativistic way. I am not sure it can be done, but the stakes are collectiveand not only personal.22.Wedde, “Walking the Dog,” .NOTES TO CHAPTER 12d391




This page intentionally left blank 




An excerpt of chapter titled “Encounters with Companion Species: En -tangling Dogs, Baboons, Philosophers, and Biologists,” will also appear inConﬁgurations,special issue from Society for Literature and Sciencemeetings, forthcoming in .Sections of earlier versions of chapters and also appeared in The Com-panion Species Manifesto(Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, ).Chapter was revised from “Cloning Mutts, Saving Tigers: Ethical Emer-gents in Technocultural Dog Worlds,” which was published in SarahFranklin and Margaret Lock, eds., Remaking Life and Death: Towards anAnthropology of the Biosciences(Santa Fe: School of American ResearchPress, ), –.Chapter was revised from “A Note of a Sportswriter’s Daughter: Com-panion Species,” which was published in Nancy Chen and Helene Moglen,eds., Bodies in the Making: Transgressions and Transformations(SantaCruz, Calif.: New Paciﬁc Press, ), –.PUBLICATION HISTORY




An early version of chapter will be published in Beatriz da Costa andKavita Philip, eds., Tactical Biopolitics: Theory and Practice @ Life, Science,Art(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).An early version of chapter will also be published in Marc Bekoﬀand Janette Nystrom, eds., Encyclopedia of Human–Animal Relationships(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group).An earlier version of chapter was published in Evan Selinger, ed., Post-phenomenology: A Critical Companion to Ihde(Binghamton: State Univer -sity of New York Press, ), –.An earlier version of chapter was published in B. Eekelen, J. Gonzalez,B. Stötzer, and A. Tsing, eds., Shock and Awe: War on Words(Santa Cruz,Calif.: New Paciﬁc Press, ), –.The ﬁrst part of chapter was expanded from “The Writer of the Com-panion Species Manifesto E-mails Her Dog People,” in Margaretta Jolly,ed., a/b: Auto/Biography Studies, nos. and ().The second part of chapter was adapted from “Replies to Five Ques-tions,” in Jan-Kyrre Berg Olsen and Evan Selinger, eds., Philosophy of Tech- nology(N.P.: Automatic Press/VIP, December ), www.philosophytechnology.com/.394dPUBLICATION HISTORY




Aborigines (Australia): “country” and,; dingoes and, , n,n; dugongs and Crittercam,; histories and naturecultures,n; knowledge practices, n;presence in Shark Bay, , n;remoras and, n; wombats and,–nAborigines (West Indies): remorasand, nAcland, Gregory, , Acquiring Genomes(Margulis andSagan),–activism (activists); as knowledgeableactors in technoculture, ;making facts real, –; multi-tasking, in dog cultures, ; roleof publicity, , –; “sciencefor the people,” ; silencing,–, ,  (see also“Incor-rigibles, the”; “Ostrich Syndrome”);volunteers, n.See alsocosmopolitics; Sharp, C. A.;worldingAdams, Carol, n; intersectional-ity and animals, n; veganism,, nAdams, Mischa, –Adolphson, Pete, –Agamben, Giorgio: “anthropo-logical machine” in philosophy,n; on Heidegger’s “theopen,” n, n; Open,The,nagility (sport), –, n;authority, relations of, – (seealsoauthority); contact obstacles,–, n (see alsocontactINDEX




zones); described, , –,n; dog breeds in, ; e-mailsociality in world of, , –;“free spaces” in world of, n;history, –; human socialworld of, , –, n,n, n, n; Internetdiscussion groups, n; partners,terminology for, ; Power Pawsagility camp, n. See alsoagilitytraining; authority; CayennePepper (dog); dog trainingagility training: attunement of part-ners, mimetic vs. nonmimetic, ;authority, relations of, – (seealsoauthority); communicationin, –; disdain for, amongsheepdog trial trainers, n;“freedom” and, –; “good run”and joy of coherence in, , ;links, making possible, –;meaning of natural in, ; asopening up the possible, ; as“partnership-in-the-making,” –, –, –, –; playand, , n; positive trainingin, –; “reciprocal induction”in, ; response vs. calculation in,–; as “subject-forming dance,”; trust and, –, ;unexpected and, . See alsoanimal training; Cayenne Pepper(dog); dog trainingagribusiness, ; dogs and, –,–; limiting “becoming with,”; links to scientiﬁc medicine, –. See alsoagropastoralism; foodsecurity; sustainability agropastoralism: vs. meat-industrial-complex, , –n; asresponse to situated histories inUnited States, , , ; Soaysheep and, n; technocultural,,  Akbash dogs. SeeTurkish Akbashdogsalter-globalization. See autre-mondialisation Althusser, Louis, Altmann, Jeanne: descriptive terms inprimate ﬁeld studies, nAmerican Zoo and Aquarium Asso-ciation (AZA): Species SurvivalPlans and, “And Say the Animal Responded?”(Derrida), , nanimal, the: as category, n; ascrime against animals, ; Derridaon, –; “philoso pheme” of, ,n. See also “making killable”Animal Cloning Sciences, Inc.(ANCL), , nanimal happiness: Hearne’s idea of,n; Wedde’s idea of, nanimal-industrial complex, nanimalization, nanimal rights, ; discourse, ,, n; movement andMcDonald’s animal care standards,n; opposition to Fresno zooreform, ; rhetorics of subju-gation, ; subject categories ofanimals in,  animals: behavior, and terms todescribe, n; personalpronouns and, –; trained, as396dINDEX




more responsive, n; troped,as “bioreactors,” nAnimal Studies Group, n“Animal That Therefore I Am (Moreto Follow), The” (Derrida),–animal training: authority and trustin, ; behavioral enrichment,n; behaviorism and, –,n; critics of, radical, ;as growing practice, n;improving lives of captive animals,; laboratory conditions and,–; positive training methods,–, n, n, n,n; technologies, in prisons,. See alsoagility training; dogtraininganthropomorphism: theriomorphismand, , nArmstrong, John, , . See alsoCANGEN-L; Canine DiversityProjectarticulations: as political (Despret),ASHGI. SeeAustralian ShepherdHealth and Genetics Instituteasymmetry: in animal trainingrelationships, –, n; incontact zone, ; in laboratory,; in play, –; in relations ofuse, –; in “sharing suﬀering,”–, “attachment sites,” Aussies. SeeAustralian shepherddogsAustralia: heterogeneous nature-cultures in, –n; webbedhistories of land and people,n. See also Aborigines(Australia); dingoesAustralian Shepherd Club ofAmerica (ASCA): collie eyeanomaly and, –; conﬂictsover AKC aﬃliation, –;Genetics Committee of, ;herding trials, , n;origins, ; stock and showcultures, nAustralian shepherd dogs: Basqueherders and, ; Churro sheep and,–; histories and origin stories,, , n; origin of name, ,; Jay Sisler and origins of, ;“U.S. western ranch dog,” , –; “versatile Aussie” discourse, Australian Shepherd Health andGenetics Institute (ASHGI), ,, ; “Ask an Expert” (onlinevolunteers), ; epilepsy activism,– (see also“Incorrigibles,the”); partnerships with geneticsresearchers, ; Ten Steps to aHealthier Australian Shepherdprogram, ; Web site, nauthority: of dog’s performance inagility (sport) , , ; ofhuman designer-trainer in agility(sport), –; and trust, inanimal training, autopoesis: Gilbert critique of,; incompatible with symbio-genesis, ; Margulis and Sagan,; Wolfe’s reworking of, nautre-mondialisation, , , , , ,, n; vs. becoming-animal,.See alsoPreciado, BeatrizINDEXd397




avian ﬂu (HN): birdwatchers and,n; human cases, , ;Indonesia and, ; mass cullingsof chickens, –, –n;Nigeria and, –; Thailandand, –Baba Joseph (ﬁctional character),–, –, , , n; asanimal caretaker, n. See alsoGirl Named Disaster, A;“wickedaction”baboons: scientist as social subject for(Smuts), – (see also“becomingwith”); studied by Rowell, ,nBaker, Steve: on Deleuze andGuattari’s becoming-animal,n; Postmodern Animal, The,nBarad, Karen, , , , ,, , , n, n,n, n; Meeting the UniverseHalfway,n.See alsointra-actionBarkmagazine, ; “Dog is my co-pilot,” , , Barrey, Jean-Claude, Basque herders: sheep dogs and, Bateson, Gregory, ; on games andplay, –; on meta-communication in play, ;“Metalogue: About Games andBeing Serious,” , , n;on nonlinguistic communication,; Steps to an Ecology of Mind,nBattiata, Mary, , nBear (dog), “Becoming-Intense, Becoming-Animal, Becoming-Imperceptible”(Deleuze and Guattari), –,n“becoming with,” , , –, , ,; baboons and scientist as socialsubjects, –; as “becomingworldly,” ; chickens and, –; contingent, and feral cats, ;in “copresence,” n; as dance ofrelating, ; limited by conditionsof agribusiness, ; play and,–; vs. posthumanism, ;proposition as lure to, ;researchers and dog subjects,; symbiogenesis, ; webs ofrelationship and, .See also com-panion species; Despret, Vinciane“becoming worldly,” , , , –,, n; “becoming feral” and,; as focusing practice, ; Jim’sDog as ﬁgure for, –. See alsocompanion speciesbehavior: animal, and terms todescribe, n; comparativegenomics and, n; diﬀerences,and evolutionary zoology, n;domestic animals, co-constituted,nbehaviorism: agnosticism to functionand meaning, ; training and, vs.caricature of, –. See alsoanimal training: positive trainingmethodsBekoﬀ, Marc, , , n; onanimal joy, n; on eating meat,–; on mind in animals,398dINDEX




n; on play, , ; on trust,Bentham, Jeremy: animal suﬀering,, nbestialization. Seeanimalizationbiocapital, , , n, n;Crittercam and, nbioethics: vs. companion speciesﬂourishing, –; “enterprisedup” at Lazaron BioTechnologies,; human cloning and, ;Missyplicity Project code, –,–; as regulatory discourse, Biopolis: as n-dimensional nichespace, nbiosociality: companion species and,, ; in dog breed worlds, ;in dog training, n; in sheepbreed worlds, ; in struggle foropen canine health registries, –; support groups and, . Seealsocompanion speciesbiotechnology: deﬁned (Russell), ;dogs as, , –, –, n.See alsoagribusiness; cloningBirke, Lynda, , n, n,nBizarro(Dan Piraro), Bleeker, Julian, n. See also“realityengines”Bobby (dog), n. See alsoLévinas, Emmanuel“bodies in technologies” (Ihde), ,“bodies in the making,” –;living/nonliving partners in,–; mimesis and, Bowker, Geoﬀ, and Susan Leigh Star,Braidotti, Rosi, nbreeds, dog. Seedog breedsbreed standard: blueprint for type notgenetic diversity, Byers, J. A.: and Beckoﬀ on play, calculation: Derrida on, n; dogtraining and getting outside of,; killing and, , ; obligatoryand insuﬃcient, , , –;unidirectional relations of useand, ; response and, in agilitytraining, –; vs. responsibilityin lab,  (see also“response”); forwhom, for what, and by whom, camera: history and etymology,–.See alsoCrittercam(instrument)Canaan dogs, ncancer: drug testing and dogs,–CANGEN-L (Canine GeneticsDiscussion Group Listserv), ,n; John Armstrong and,, ; breeders and scientistson, , ; C. A. Sharp and,–.See alsoCanine DiversityProjectCanine Diversity Project, , –, n; “diversity itself” as core,; dog breeds as “endangeredspecies” in, ; range of Web site,; rhetorical devices, –;Web site, n. See alsoCANGEN-L; Species SurvivalPlansINDEXd399




Canine Genome Project, U.S., nCanine Health Information Center(CHIC): open database, nCappuccino (dog), , , ,ncare: curiosity and, in judging ﬂour-ishing, n; in dog geneticsactivism, ; felt reason and,; feminism and, n; ininstrumental relationships,  (seealsorelationship, instrumental); asknowing well,  (see also“know-ing more at the end of the day”);in laboratory, , –, –;nonmimetic and multispeciesﬂourishing, , ; required forworlding, ; of research ers for labanimals, ; veterinary, , Cargill, John, cartoons: “Abuse of the Patriot Act!”(Peters), ; “Dog and HandlerForm a Team” (Liddle), ;“Forgot the Course” (Liddle), ;“F. Oscar Haraway” (Bowie), ;“Leonardo da Vinci’s Dog”(Harris), ; “McTrap” (Piraro),; “Meeting of the AmericanAssociation of Lapdogs” (Piraro),; “Only Taking Tissue Samples”(Rini), ; “Peace Chicken”(Piraro); “Raised by Scientists”(Miller),Cassidy, Rebecca, ncats: Deleuze and Guattari and,n; Derrida’s, –; feral,–; trap and release programsfor sterilization, . See alsocompanion animalscattle: Golan Heights, –, nCaudill, Susan, , , , nCayenne Pepper (dog), –, , ,, –; agility training, ,–, –, –, –, , –, –, –;breeders, ; comforting touchand, –; contact zones and,–, ; deafness, unilateral,n; experience of “losingcontact” and, –; “freedom”and, , –; herding theretrievers, ; invented sex playwith Willem (dog), –;invitations to play, , ; joyand, –; love and entangle-ments of this book, –;merle gene and deafness, n;partnership-in-the-making inagility (sport), –; pedigreeand Sisler dogs, ; photos, ,; regard and, ; research con-tributions, ; C. A. Sharp and,; word recognition andgeneralization, nCEA. Seecollie eye anomalyCell Dogs(Animal Planet), –;dogs as inmates, ; dogs as“modern subjects,” chicken meat and egg industries:battery cages, ; “Bush legs,” ;“ChickenNobs” (Atwood, Oryxand Crake), , n; condi-tions of factory production, ,–n; designer eggs, ,n; history, –, n;human laborers, , n;McCruelty to Go campaign,400dINDEX




n; Petaluma Farms, –n; pollution and, ; RareBreeds Survival Trust againstfactory farming in, ; scale,worldwide, , n; slaughterin, nChicken Run,chickens: animal rescue and, n;avian ﬂu and, – (see alsoavian ﬂu); breeds, protection of,; eggs, n; genetic modiﬁ-cation for meat, , , n,n; human history and, –; illegal trade in, , n;mass cullings, , –n;“pecking order” and complex socialarrangements, ; Petaluma and,n, n, n; relationswith humans, n; slaughter,, , n; “spent hens,” –n; standardization, n;James Tipree Jr., and, –,n. See alsochicken meat andegg industries; killing“Chinese Year of the Dog” (DavidGoines poster), Chomsky, Noam: on language inanimals and humans, –. Seealso“Faculty of Language, The”Chow-chows, , . See alsoRoland(dog)Churchill, Kristina, Churro sheep, –. See alsoNavajo sheepcitizenship: biological, , n;genetic, , nCixous, Hélène: “Stigmata, or Job theDog,” –Clean Run magazine, nCliﬀord, Jim, , n. See alsoJim’sDog: contact zones and, –cloning (somatic cell nuclear transfer):Dolly (sheep), ; horses, n;human, –, ; MissiplicityProject (dogs), , , –,n; Nine Lives Extravaganza(cats), , n; price forcompanion animals, ; Snuppy(dog), –, n; tool topreserve dog genetic diversity, .See alsoGenetic Savings andClone, Inc.; Hwang Woo-Sukco-constitution/co-shaping, , ;of dogs, sheep, humans in sheeptrialing, n; symbionts and,–; of trope and ﬂesh,n. See also“becoming with”;companion speciesCoe, Sue, n; Pit’s Letter,nCoetzee, J. M.: Disgrace,–;Elizabeth Costello,n; “equalityof slaughter,” , n; Lives ofAnimals,coﬂourishing. Seeﬂourishing,multispecies“coherence” (Whitehead), –.See alsopropositionsCole, Kirstin, collie eye anomaly (CEA): inAustralian shepherd dogs, ,n, n; clearing by test-breeding, ; denied by breedersand scientists, ; establishingfact as autosomal recessive gene,–; gene test for, –,n; “popular sire” matings andINDEXd401




spread, ; support networks,, n; test matings, commodity: consumption in dogworlds, –; dogs as, –;Marx on, –. See alsocompan-ion animal industry; pet care; petfood; valuecommunication, embodied: greetingsas, ; language and, n; asrelationship, ; truth and, –;Wolfe on, ncompanion: etymology, companion-animal industry: global,–; information, proprietary,, n, n; size of, –.See alsocompanion animals; petcare; pet food companion animals, n;bioethics and, ; chiropracticcare, ; cloning and, –, ,–, –, n–; asemergent entities, ; as experi-mental subjects in cancer drugtesting, –; households with,; human health and, , n;material-semiotic work of, n;print culture, ; spending on, ;transformation of dogs as “pets” to,–; veterinary education, ,n. See alsocompanion-animalindustry; pet care; pet foodcompanion species, , , , , ,n, n, n; bond ofshared risk, ; vs. “companion animal,” ; cyborg as, ; deﬁned,, , –; emergenceand, ; “fabulated plausible”(Piccinini), , ; feral cats as,–; indigestion and, n;Marx, no room for in, ; micro-scopic, –; nonliving partners,– (see alsoHaraway, FrankOutten); OncoMouse™as, ;“the open” and, n; play of kinand kind, ; vs. posthumanism,; range of beings as, –;relations of use and, ; surprise inrelationship, ; “torque” and, ;worldliness, –.See also“becoming with”; companion;speciesCompanion Species Manifesto, The(Haraway), Conant, Susan, , n, nconformation, nconsumerism. Seecommodity;companion-animal industrycontact zones, , ; in agility (sport),–, ; in anthropology(Kohn; Tsing), –; in chem-istry, n; of chick embryo inbiology lab, ; in colonial studies(Pratt), ; in conservationprojects, ; in cultural studies(Cliﬀord), –; in develop-mental biology (Gilbert), –(see alsoreciprocal induction); inecology, ; entangled communi-cation and, –; “the open”and, n; of salmon and people,n; in science ﬁction, “contract” theory, , nCoppin, Dawn, n; “CapitalistPigs,” n“copresence” (Smuts), ; as some-thing tasted, 402dINDEX




coproduction: “making companions,”; of natures and cultures inbiotechnologies,  Coren, Stanley: on “theory of mind”in dogs, cosmopolitics (Stengers), , ,n; and being “polite,”  (seealsomanners); deﬁned, , ; ofeating well together, –;entanglement and, ; foreclosedby “good manners,” ; inlaboratory, ; required forcompanion-species worlding, Cox, Graham, and Tony Ashford:on domestic animal training,nCreation of Adam (Michelangelo), Crist, Eileen, nCrittercam (instrument): animalsas asymmetrical actors in, ;attaching to animals, –;commensal vs. companion relation-ship to people, –; complexphysicality of, –; compoundsociality in, , ; as contactzone, –; epistemological-ethical obligations to animals, ;National Geographic Societyfunding, –; origin story, ;progressive miniaturization, ;ramora model, –; technicaldescriptions of, ; work“delegated” to, Crittercam (TV show), –n;Aboriginal people and, , n,n; announcements and fram-ing narratives, –; Bristol Bayas setting, n; collaborationswith scientists, , –,n; Crittercam footage, ;dugongs, –; non-Crittercamunderwater footage, –;promise of scientiﬁc knowledge,–; salvation narratives andapparatus, , –; Shark Bayas setting, –, n; turtles,, ; visual structuring, –; whales, , –, n“critters,” ; as relationally entangled,n; sharing suﬀering and,nCrouch, Martha, –crutches, as partner in companion-species relationship. See Haraway,Frank Outtencryopreservation, –; “save agenetic life” (LazaronBioTechnologies), ; tool tomanage dog breed genome, Csicsery-Ronay, Istvan, nculture: not limited to humans,n. See alsonatureculturesCulver, Pat, Cuomo, Chris, curiosity: “becoming with” and, ;of biologists, ; Derrida’s failureof, , ; Haraway’s failure of,n; as obligation, ;Rabinow on, n; role in deter-mining ﬂourishing, n;situated knowledges and, ; aswarrant for “wicked action,”.See alsocarecyborg, , ; as companion species,. See alsonarcissism, wounds to:cyborgianINDEXd403




“Cyborg Manifesto” (Haraway),Darwin ﬁsh, , nDarwinism. Seeevolution, DarwinianDavis, Angela, nDeChant, Ann, –“degrees of freedom,” –, . Seealso“unfree”de la Cruz, Catherine, , , ,n; struggle for open caninehealth registries, Delany, Samuel: Babel-, Deleuze, Giles, and FélixGauttari, ; becoming-animal vs.“becoming with,” ; “Becoming-Intense, Becoming-Animal,Becoming-Imperceptible,” –;primitivism and racialism, n;scorn for ordinary, –, n–; Thousand Plateaus, A,n;wolf/dog opposition, ; wolfpack, nDenniston, Richard, Derr, Mark: on Navajo dogs, nDerrida, Jacques, , , ; “AndSay the Animal Responded?” ,n; “Animal That Therefore IAm (More to Follow), The,” –,n–; curiosity, failure of, ,, n; Derrida’s cat, –;“eating well,” , ; “‘EatingWell,’ or the Calculation of theSubject,” n; exterminism, ;feminist literatures and, n;on Freud and human exceptional-ism, , n; Great Dividesand, ; logic of sacriﬁce, –,n; “philosopheme” of Animal,n (see also animal, the); onresponse vs. reaction, –, ;on responsibility and calculation,–; sacriﬁce and calculation,n; on shame, –; onsuﬀering, , nDerry, Margaret: Bred for Perfection,Despret, Vinciane, ; “anthropo-zoo-genetic practice,” ; onarticulating bodies as political, ;on authority and trust in animaltraining, ; “becoming with,”n; “The Body We Care For,”n; on Thelma Rowell, ,n developmental biology, –,n. See alsoreciprocal inductionDHNN. SeeDouble Helix NetworkNewsDiderot, Denis: egg in D’Alembert’sDream,–ndiﬀerence: language and, –;mind and, –. See alsocom-panion species; Great DividesDin Diné bí’ íína’ (Navajo Lifeways),dingoes, , , n, n,n, n, ndiversity, genetic. Seegenetic diversity;genetic diversity in dog breeds“Diversity Murders” on CANGEN-L,–Dixon, Robyn, DNA: diagnostic testing and screen-ing programs, n, n,n, n; parentage404dINDEX




veriﬁcation for litters, n. Seealsocollie eye anomaly; epilepsy inAustralian shepherd dogs; merlecoat; Tay-Sachs diseasedog breeders, –; as activists,, ; ethics discussions inEpiGENES, ; genetic diseasesin dogs and, –, , –; openness and health tests,n; “popular sire syndrome”and line breeding, –, n;resistance to relevance of popula-tion genetics, ; resistance torelevance of Species SurvivalPlans, , –; scientists and,–, n; Ten Steps to aHealthier Australian Shepherdprogram for, –; versatile dogsand, . See alsodog breeding;“Incorrigibles, the”; “OstrichSyndrome”; Sharp, C. A.dog breeding: as art, ; ethical, ascottage industry, ; holistic, ;inbreeding and disease-linkedgenes, n; line breeding in,; popular sire in, –,n. See alsobreed standarddog breeds: biosocial aparatus of,–; as “endangered species” inSpecies Survival Plans, , ,; genome projects and, ;global proliferation, ; in identitydiscourses, n; names andtypological conventions, –;pedigrees as public record keeping,; scientiﬁc breeding, . See alsogenetic diversity in dog breeds;purebred dogs; speciﬁc breedsdog genome projects, –, n,n; behavioral genetics and,n; breeds and, ; free publicdatabase,  dog kennels: trialing ndogs: ability to read behavior ofhumans, n; as agents ofknowledge, ; agribusiness and,–, –; in Americas beforeEuropeans, n, n; asbiotechnologies, ; bites andmaulings, , n; burial sitesand dog-human relationships,n, n; carrying minicams(camdogs), n; co-constitutionwith humans, n; colorperception in, n; as com-modities, , ; as consumers,–; hemophilic, as patients/technologies, –, ; inheritinghistories of, –, ; lives inlaboratories, –, n; as“modern subjects,” , ; “partdogs” in biotechnology, –; inprisons, –, n; questionof mind and, n; as researchmodels and model patients, –,–, n; in settler colonies,n; as targets for human drugs,–; therapy, , n; astools, ; as workers, –. Seealsocloning;dog breeders; dogbreeding; dog breeds; herdingdogs; livestock guardian dogs;working dogs;speciﬁc breedsDogs with Jobs(TV show), dog training: Graham Cox andTony Ashford on, n;INDEXd405




domestication, question of, and,, n, n; learning tolearn and, ; “natural” in, ;positive training methods, –,n, n, n, n;Jay Sisler, n; unexpected in,. See also animal training;positive trainingDolly (sheep). Seecloning: DollyDolly Mixtures(Franklin), ,n, ndomestication: as “anthropo-zoo-genetic practice” (Despret), ;complex relationships of, ,n; co-shaping behavior in,n, n; discourse of sin,; “unruly edges” and (Tsing), Double Helix Network News(DHNN),; criticisms of linebreeding and “popular siresyndrome,” ; origins, , ;shift to genetic diversity focus, Douglas, Pam, –. See alsoToby(dog); Toby’s Foundationdugongs, , Dumit, Joseph, n; “playfultruths,” eating: “becoming with” and, –;cosmopolitics and questions of,–; hunting and, –;killing and, ; placenta, –;temptations in making decisionsabout, ; together, and commu-nity, –“eating well”: Derrida on, ,, n; “killing well” and, ,, ; “knowing well” and, ,; as “nourishing indigestion,”;Elgin, Suzette Haden: Native Tongue,, n“Embodied Communication inNonhuman Animals” (Smuts), ,nembodiment, worldly: as dynamic,–; technologies as, . Seealso“infoldings of the ﬂesh”emergence: companion species and,; vs. “reciprocal induction,”n; vs. “revolution,” emergents: bioethics and, ;companion animals with others,; relationships among, –empathy: animals and, n,nencounters: dog-human, in prisons,–; in “dogland,” –;language and, ; making beings,; touch and, –; trans-species, “encounter value”: as axis of livelycapital, ; trans-species, in addi-tion to use and exchange value, .See alsoencounters; valueendangered species: dog breeds as, indiversity discourse, , , ;as humanist discourse, ; rhetoricof apocalypse, , . See alsoSpecies Survival Plansentanglement, , , , , n;companion-species worlding and,; domestication and, ; vs.exterminism, ; feral cats andhumans in biopolitical state, –; of genomes, n (see also406dINDEX




symbiogenesis); impact of humanpopulation growth, ; “the open”in agility training and, . See alsocosmopolitics; “critters”EpiGENES online chat group:breeder ethics, –; conﬁden-tiality and “the Incorrigibles,” –; epilepsy activism, –epilepsy in Australian shepherd dogs:activists attacked, – (see also“Incorrigibles, the”); denial of, (see also“Ostrich Syndrome”);EpiGENES chat group, –;publicity campaigns, – (seealso“Face of Epilepsy, The”)epilepsy in humans, nepistemophilias, , n“equality of slaughter,” , neugenics: and dog breeds, evolution, Darwinian, , n–,n; belief in, by country,n; and Kansas Board ofEducation, exceptionalism, human, –, ,, –, n; vs. “becomingwith,” ; blinding to speciesinterdependence, ; facing theoutrage of, ; humanization ofanimal partners, ; killing and,– (see also“making killable”);language and, –, n;mind and, –; Marx and, ,n. See alsonarcissism, woundsto; teleologyexterminism: Derrida on, ; moralabsolutes contributing to, ;stopping, , . See also“makingkillable”“face”: being “face-to-face” and,  (seealsocompanion species; “signiﬁcantothers”); having, , , ; labanimals, ; truth and, . See alsoLévinas, Emmanuel“Face of Epilepsy, The,” –fact, making: collie eye anomaly,–; in scientiﬁc and laycommunities, –“Faculty of Language, The” (Hauseret al.), –nfallacy, naturalistic: as mirror totranscendental humanism, families: human-animal companion-ate, ; making, Farmer, Nancy: Girl Named Disaster,A,–, n. See alsoBabaJosephFedigan, Linda, n, nfeminism: animals and, , n–,n; humanism and, –;killing and, ; Marxist, andanimals as workers, –, n.See alsointersectionality; stand-point theory, feministﬁgure(s): Biopolis as, –n;companion species as, ;ﬁguration and, , n; asmaterial-semiotic knots, –“ﬁngery eyes” (Hayward), , ,–, n, nFips (dog), –Fischer, Michael: “contract” theory,nﬂuourishing, multispecies, , ;core ecological feminist value, ;detailed practices of care, –; asethical issue, –; geneticINDEXd407




health, ; introduced speciesand, –; killing and, n;nonmimetic caring, ; questionof, as provocation to research andresponse, n; requiring con-tradictory truths, ; vs. salvation,. See alsocompanion speciesfood security, , n. See alsosustainabilityForgotten Felines, Foucault, Michel: biopower, Franklin, Adrian, n, n;Animal Nation,n; ondingoes, nFranklin, Sarah, n, n;breedwealth, ; Dolly Mixtures,, n, n, nFrazier, Gail, , , , , ,, nFrench bulldogs, ; history, n. SeealsoPreciado, BeatrizFreud, Sigmund: and Deleuze andGuattari, –; wounds tonarcissism, –, nFudge, Erica, n, nFuller, John L. See Scott, John Paul,and John L. Fullergame: vs. play, game story. SeeHaraway, FrankOuttenGarrett, Susan, ngaze: and animal, –, . See also“face”GDC. SeeInstitute for GeneticDisease Control in Animalsgenetic diseases in dogs:Australian Shepherd Society ofAmerica and, ; DNA screen-ing tests and, –, n,n; inbreeding and, n;in mutts and purebreds, n;social networks and, . Seealsocollie eye anomaly; epilepsyin Australian shepherd dogs;Sharp, C. A.genetic diversity: as banked resourcein Species Survival Plan, ; asdiscourse, vs. dog breeders’discourse, ; naturalculturalcomplexity of discourse, genetic diversity in dog breeds, –, –; breeding practicesand, , –, n (see also“Ostrich Syndrome”); CanineDiversity Project and, –; vs.discourse of medical genetics, ;early research, ; as goal, vs.breed standard, ; “popular siresyndrome” and line breedingas inbreeding, , , ;population genetics and, ,–. See alsoCANGEN-L;Sharp, C. A.Genetic Savings and Clone, Inc.,, n, n; bioethicsstatement, –; tissue and genebank, genome projects, dog, –;commercialization, n,ngenomes: dog, –; human andviral, n. See alsogenomeprojectsgenomics, comparative: “domestic”entanglements of dogs and humans408dINDEX




and, n; knockout mice and,–n; medical, and dogs,nGerman collie dogs: Australianshepherd dogs and, Ghamari-Tabrizi, Sharon, ; on labanimals, –Gilbert, Scott F.: care of lab animals,; critique of autopoiesis,–;Developmental Biology,n;diﬀerentiation as verb, ;embryonic co-construction, ;“interspecies epigenesis,” ,n; reciprocal inductionand contact zones, ; turtleembryology, Ginsburg, Benson, Ginsburg, Faye, –, , nGirl Named Disaster, A(Farmer), –, nGodzich, Wlad, Golan Heights, n; livestockguardian dogs and, –Goodall, Jane, Goslinga, Gillian, n, n,nGrandin, Temple: on language andthinking, n; piglet nurture,n; reforming slaughterpractices, nGreat Divides (Latour), ; andmodern terrors, –, Great Pyrenees (livestock guardiandogs), ; breeders, ; “dualpurpose” or “whole dog” discourse,; hip dysplasia and, –;introduction to French Alps, ; inUnited States, greetings: as dance of relating, –,nGrosz, Elizabeth, nGustafson, Claire, Hadﬁeld, Michael, n; andﬂourishing of Hawaiian tree snailsin lab, –Hangin’ Tree kennels, nHaraway, Bill, Haraway, Debra, nHaraway, Frank Outten, –;agility (sport) and, –; child-hood, –, n; craft ofwriting, ; crutches and wheel-chairs as partners, –, –, ; game story and, –,, ; photos, –; “regard,”, –, , , , ;sportswriter, , , –,n; “staying in the game,” ;table tennis champion, Haraway, Mark, nHarding, Susan, n; “revoicing,”Hartsock, Nancy, , n, nHauser, Marc: on language inanimals and humans, , –n; on mind in animals,nHawthorne, Lou, –; on ahimsain bioethics code of MissyplicityProject, ; on companionanimals as works of art, ; asconﬁdence man, –; onorigins of Missyplicity Project,. See alsoGenetic Savings andClone, Inc.INDEXd409




Hayward, Eva, , n, n,n, n. See also“ﬁngery eyes”Hearne, Vicki, , , n;animal happiness, n; onpositive training methods, –n, n; respect for dogs,nHeidegger, Martin: Dasein,n,n; “the open,” n. See alsoopen, theHeithaus, Mike, –hemophilia: dog models for, –;and dogs as patients, , , –Henderson, April, nherding dogs: as biotechnologies,; inheriting histories of, ;movements of sheep and, –;Navajo, –; sheep, cattle, andducks as partners in trials, n;sheep trials and, ; as tools andlaborers, , n; trialingkennels (seedog kennels: trialing).See alsosheepdogsHerzig, Rebecca M.: Suﬀering forScience,nhip dysplasia, canine, , ,n; registries for GreatPyrenees, –histories, lived, in touch of a dog,–. See also“inheritinghistories”Hogness, Katharine: touch and,–Hogness, Rusten, , –, ,, –, nHogness, Thorﬁn, Holliday, Billie: “Strange Fruit,”nHolocaust: as analogy to meat eatingby Coetzee, . See also“equality ofslaughter”honesty: in agility (sport), ; andembodied communication, ; andrespect, Human Genome Project, nhumanism, –, n, n; ofanimal rights discourse, n;animals as victims and, n;animals as workers and, ;“endangered species” discourse as,; Great Divides and, –, ;logic of sacriﬁce and, –;subject categories and, . See alsoexceptionalism, humanhumanization of animals, hunting, –; veganism and, onlove of animals, Hutchinson, G. Evelyn, nHwang Woo-Suk: dog cloning, –; human embryonic stem cellcloning (hESC) scandal, , nIhde, Don, n, n; “bodies intechnologies,” , ; Bodies inTechnology, nimmunology: self/non-self vs.“becoming with,” , ninbreeding: disease-linked genes and,n.See alsodog breeding“Incorrigibles, the” (dog breedersobstructing genetic disease disclo-sures): attacks on epilepsy activists,, –; collie eye anomalyand, ; role of public ads inquieting, , –; threateninglawsuits,  410dINDEX




indigestion, n; gestation and,–; messmates and, , ,; required with companionspecies, , , n; symbiosisand, . See also“nourishingindigestion”individualism, ninduction, reciprocal. See“reciprocalinduction”Industrializing Organisms(Schrepferand Scranton), ninequality. Seeasymmetry“infoldings of the ﬂesh” (Merleau-Ponty), , n; Crittercam as,“inheriting histories”: of companionspecies, –, –; of dogs andsheep, –; of working andnonworking dogs, . See also“response”; touchInstitute for Genetic Disease Controlin Animals (GDC): databasemerged with OFA, ; grassrootsadvocacy in reponse to threats to,; open registries, ; “wholedog” approach, instrumentality. Seerelationship,instrumentalInternational Directory forAustralian Shepherd Health(IDASH), “interpellation” (Althusser), –intersectionality, , , n; ani-mals and, n. See also feminismintra-action (Barad), , , , ,n, n, n; of genomes,n; instrumental, of people andanimals in labs,  Irish wolfhound, nisopraxis: between partners in horseriding, ; Vincent’s (dog) smileand, nJames(Piccinini), –, nJim’s Dog: contact zones and, ; asﬁgure, , ; situated, –Johnson, George, Jolly, Alison, –, nJones, Patrice, –njoy, n, n; as “addiction” inagility sports, ; vs. fun, –;“getting it” together in action, ;in play, as root of morality, ;purposelessness and,  Kansas Board of Education: on evo-lution, Kelley, Lindsay, nkennel clubs: DNA parentage veri-ﬁcation of litters, n; role innurturing dog kinds, nkennels: role of founding dogs inrecognition of, ; trialing,n killable, making. See“making killable”killing: animal, and human popula-tion growth, n; chickens,n; culling birds (seeavian ﬂu:mass culling of chickens); cullingdogs in breeding, n; decisionsabout eating and, –; dyingand, ; in experimental labs, –, ; feminist questions and, ,; human population growthand, ; hunting and, –;insuﬃciency of calculation and, ,INDEXd411




; vs. murder, –; of Navajosheep, by United States, ;nurture and, –; “response-ability” and, , ; of signiﬁcantothers, necessity of, ; slaughter,U.S. and U.K., n; Tiptree on,n; wolf-dog hybrids, . Seealso “making killable”“killing well”: “eating well” and, ,, ; as obligation, kin: and brand, ; and kind in ﬁgureof companion species, ; madethrough love, ; subject cate-gories and, Kindred Spirits conference, , King, Katie, –, n,n, n, n, n,n; on conversation, n;on “past-presents,” , n,nKirksey, Eben, nKGENES listserv, –“knots.” See “critters”; entanglement“knowing more at the end of the day,”, . See alsocompanionspecies; Sharp, C. A.; worldingKraemer, Duane, Kuzniar, Alice: Melancholia’s Dog,nlab animals: care and, , n;conditions of ﬂourishing, –,–; “face” and, ; living condi-tions, –, n; measures ofdistress and well-being, n;morality and, requirements of,; not necessarily victims, ;question of who beneﬁts, ;slaughter, question of, ; “unfree,”–. See also“sharing suﬀering”La Bare, Sha, nlabor: animal, –; chicken, ;dog, –, , ; feministanalyses of women’s, n;hermeneutic, of Crittercam, –; humanist teleology of, inMarx, , n; multispecies, inlaboratory, , , –; systemsof, and worldliness, laboratory, experimental: labor ofanimals in, ; moral sensibilityand, ; practices of care in, –;as total environment (Ghamari-Tabrizi), . See alsolab animalslanguage: communication and,n; “continuity hypothesis” foranimal and human, , n;co-shaping without, n;“descrete inﬁnity,” n, n;“fast mapping” of words to objectsin dogs, n; functional,narrow vs. broad senses of, n;generalization in dogs, n;opportunism in evolution of,n; question of, in play, ;subjectivity (Wolfe) and, –n; thinking (Grandin) and,nLatour, Bruno, , , , n,n, n; “things,” . Seealso Great DividesLaw, John, and Annemarie Mol, –, nLazaron BioTechnologies, –,n, n. See also “saving agenetic life”412dINDEX




Lease, Gary, –, n; huntingand love of animals, –Leﬄer, Ann, n“Leonardo da Vinci’s Dog” (Harriscartoon), –Lévinas, Emmanuel, , ; “TheName of a Dog, or NaturalRights,” –nLGD-L (Livestock Guardian DogListserv), n“lively capital”: companion speciesand, –; Marx and, –livestock guardian dogs (LGD):Akbash, – (see alsoTurkishAkbash dogs); Great Pyrenees,–; in history of settlercolonies, ; as workers andbiotechnologies, –logic of sacriﬁce: alternatives to, ;Derrida on, –, n;humanism and, –; inlaboratory experiments, ; loveand, ; scapegoat and, . See also“making killable”“looking back”: becoming-with-companions and, ; respect and,, , , . See alsocompanionspecies; regard; respectlove: companion species, , ;epistomophelia and, n;naturalcutural practice, ; playand, , ; requiring “knowingmore at the end of the day,” ,; requiring speculative thoughtand remembering, , ;symbiosis with knowledge andresponsibility, ; unconditional,, , , ; as worldliness,. See alsocare; entanglement;“love of the breed”; “signiﬁcantotherness”; touch“love of the breed,” , , ;cross-species kinship webs and,; ﬂourishing vs. anthropomor-phism and anthropocentrism, ;other-centered ethics and, ,; Sharp embodying, , Low, Tim: “feral futures,” nMaguire (Haraway), Dorothy, –“making killable”: in factory chickenindustry, n; hatred and, ;hunting and, ; logic of sacriﬁceand, , n; Man, in ChristianStory, n; vs. murder, ; asroot of exterminism, ; standardof sentience and, ; “Thou shaltnot make killable,” , . See alsokilling; “wicked action”Making Parents(Thompson), –manners, , ; foreclosing cosmo -politics, . See also“politics”Margulis, Lynn: Acquiring Genomes,, n; autopoesis, ,n; symbiogenesis, , , Marshall, Greg: National GeographicSociety and, –; origins ofCrittercam, Marx, Karl: humanist teleology, ,n; specie, ; use andexchange value as relationships, .See also“encounter value”material-semiotic: co-constitution oftrope and ﬂesh, n; dance, ,; nodes, ﬁgures as, ; work, ofcompanion animals, nINDEXd413




Mbembe, Achille:; animalization and,nMcCaig, Donald, , nMcFall-Ngai, Margaret, –McNally, Karen, McNeal, Lyle, “Meeting of the American Associationof Lapdogs” (Piraro cartoon), Mendieta, Eduardo, n, nmerle coat, n; deafness andgenetics of, nmessmate. Seecompanion; indiges-tion; symbiogenesisMetcalf, Jake, nmice: “becoming with” and, n;knockout, and comparativegenomics, –n; laboratory,standardized, n. See alsoOncoMouseMichalski, Rob, nMiller, Jaye, , Miller-Haraway, Rick (and Roberta),, , –mimicry: of dog’s smile, n. Seealsoisopraxismind: question of animal, n;theory of, in other critters, –,nmind-body dualism: failure to comeface-to-face with animals and, –, Mintz, Sidney: symbiogeneticnaturecultures of sugar, nMissy (dog), , nMissyplicity Project, , , ,n; bioethics code, –,–; goals, ; scientiﬁc team,Mitchison, Naomi: Memoirs of aSpacewoman,Mixotricha paradoxa,; as“multitude,” Mobley, Heidi, Monti, Kim, ; openness asbreeder, n; Ten Stepsprogram, , nmorality: and roots in trust and play,“more-than-human” worlds, ,n; impact of humanpopulation growth, Morey, Darcy F., n, nMother Goose and Grimm(MikePeters), mundane, the. Seeordinary, theMunyard, Kylie: and AustralianShepherd Health Registry ofAustralasia, mutts: bias toward, of author, ;cloning and, –; “endan-gered species of one” (Denniston),. See also MissyplicityProjectMyers, Natasha, n“Name of a Dog, or Natural Rights,The” (Lévinas), nNamir, Sheila, nnarcissism, wounds to, ;Copernican, ; cyborgian, ;Darwinian, , ; Freudian, .See alsoexceptionalism, humanNational Geographic Channel. SeeCrittercam(TV show)National Human Genome ResearchInstiture (NHGRI): canine414dINDEX




genetics and, n; dog genomeand, nnationalisms and animals, n“natural”: in dog training, naturecultures: in Australia, ,–n; companion species and,, ; “contract theory” and,n; Crittercam and, ; dog-human, , , , , ; ethicsin, , ; vs. Great Divides, ;in Indonesia (Tsing), ; situated,; of slaughter houses, n;symbiogenetic, of sugar, nNavajo dogs, , nNavajo sheep, –. See alsoChurro sheepNelson, Betty, nonhumanism, ; companion speciesas, . See also“becoming with”;companion species; humanism;worldingNoske, Barbara: on complex relationsof domestication, n“Notes of a Sportswriter’s Daughter”(Haraway), “nourishing indigestion,” , OncoMouse: as ﬁgure withinChristian realism, “ontological choreography”(Thompson), , , , open, the, , , , n; being“out of place” and, ; Heidegger’sas rooted in “profound boredom,”n, n; interestingquestions and, ; as “mortalentanglement” in agility training,; “response” and, , , n;rooted in “shock of ‘getting it,’”n; temporal, –;“twenty-third bowl” as, . See also“becoming with”; companionspecies; “response”ordinary, the, ; “becoming worldly”and, , ; Deleuze and Guattari’sscorn for, ; “playing in the mud,”, ; vs. the sublime, Orthopedic Foundation for Animals(OFA): GDC database mergedwith, ; hip dysplasia and, ;searchable disease databases,nOryx and Crake(Margaret Atwood),, n“Ostrich Syndrome” (about geneticdisease): collie eye anomaly and,; epilepsy and, Other, the: “making killable” and, ;vs. signiﬁcant others, . See alsoanimal, the; Great DividesOthers to Man. SeeGreat DividesOxford, Gayle, and Shannon Oxford,Padgett, George, pain. SeesuﬀeringPainlevé, Jean, and GenevieveHamon, –; Love Life of theOctopus, The,paraphilias, , npartners: in agility (sport), –; indomestication and training, –;not all alive, – (see alsoHaraway, Frank Outten); notpreexisting relating, . See also“becoming with”INDEXd415




“pastpresents” (King), n–Pearse, Vicki, n; practices ofcare, pedigrees: genetic diseases and,n; history of dog, ;measurements of inbreeding, ;measurements of kinship, ; rolein dog breeding, –; role inSpecies Survival Plan, Pemberton, Stephen: on dogs ashemophilia models and patients,People for the Ethical Treatment ofAnimals (PETA): campaignsagainst cruelty to chickens, npet care: diets and supplements, ;health insurance, ; healthprofessionals, , ; hotels andvacations, , n; humandrugs and, –; medical treat-ments, –, –. See alsoanimal training; veterinarianspet food: global factory farminglinked to, , ; globalization,; niche markets, ; spending on,, npets. Seecompanion animalsPiccinini, Patricia: fabulated plausiblecompanion species, ; introducedspecies, –; James(drawing),–, n; Nature’s LittleHelpers series, , n; Surro-gate (for the Northern Hairy-NosedWombat),; Web site, n. Seealsosurrogate speciespigs: factory farm conditions, ,n; feral, , –n;pork tissue culture, nplacenta: as meal, –, play, , –n; asymmetries ofpower and, –; commitmentto risk in, ; co-shaping withoutlanguage in, n; functionlessknowing and, ; game vs., ;interesting mistakes and muddlesin, –; inventive potency of,; letting go of the literal in, ;meaning loosed from function,; metacommunication as sinequa non of, ; opening updegrees of freedom, ; purpose-lessness and joy, , ; questionof, vs. question of suﬀering, ;requiring “reciprocal induction,”; risk, ; as root of morality,; Saﬁ (dog) and Wister(donkey), –, , , ,; as tool in positive training,; trust and, “playful truths” (Dumit), Plummer, Lauri, nPlumwood, Val: “earth others,” “politics” (polite): multispeciesﬂourishing and, . See alsocosmopoliticsPollan, Michael: Omnivore’s Dilemma,The,npopulation biology: vs. lines andbreeds in dog breeding, , positive training, n, n,n, n; behaviorism andreinforcement, –; details indog training, –posthumanism, ; animals asworkers and, ; “becoming with”vs., –; Great Divides and,416dINDEX




–; nonteleological thinking in,n; requiring “the open,” Potts, Annie, nPratt, Mary Louise: “contact zone,”; Imperial Eyes,Preciado, Beatriz, ; French bull-dogs, n. See also autre-mondialisationPrimate Encounters(Strum andFedigan), n, nPrimate Visions(Haraway), n,nprison dogs, –, nProject Noah’s Ark, propositions: coherence and, ; asinitiating play, ; as lure to“becoming with,” –; notlimited to humans, ; as socialadventure, –; Whitehead’snotion of, prosaic, the: training and, ,n.See alsoordinary, theProzac: and dogs, –Pryor, Karen: positive trainingmethods for dogs, Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria, n,n; and “thinking with care,”nPullman, Philip (His Dark Materialsseries) and human-daemon link,purebred dogs, ; bias against, Pyr-L (Great Pyrenees Listserv), Rader, Karen: Making Mice, n“Raised by Scientists” (Millercartoon),–; as ﬁgure ofauthor, –Randolph, Lynn: Passion of Onco-Mouse, The,rape: and Great Divides, –;term in primate ﬁeld studies,nRapp, Rayna: on genetic citizenship,nRare Breeds Survival Trust (RBST),n, n; against factoryfarming of chickens, Ray, Cully, Reaktion Books: animal series, n,n“reality engines” (Bleeker), nreason: calculation and, –; felt,; suﬃcient vs. mundane, “reciprocal induction,” , ,n, n; agility trainingas, ; isopraxis and, in horseriding, ; love as, . See also“becoming with”; developmentalbiology; Gilbert, Scott F.Reed, Adam, nregard, , –; vs. humanexceptionalism, . See alsoHaraway, Frank Outten; “lookingback”; respectregistries, canine health: closed,problem of, ; Institute forGenetic Disease Control inAnimals and, ; open, , ,–, n; participation in,as key, , , n. See alsoSharp, C. A.registry, breed club: Australianshepherd dogs, , “relation in response,” n. See also“response”INDEXd417




relationship: as smallest pattern foranalysis, , nrelationship, instrumental: asymmetry in, , ; not necessarily unfree-dom and violation, ; obligationof care and, ; obligation ofresponse and, remora: description, n; humanuse value, n; inspiration forCrittercam, reproduction: biomedical mode of,vs. capitalist, ; enterprised up,; vs. production, ; symbolicpower of, –. See alsocloning;dog breeders; dog breeding; dogbreedsrespecere. Seerespectrespect, , , , ; companion-species worlding and, , ;regard and, vs. “gaze,” –;“species” and, “response,” ; in action, ; as asym-metrical in training, –,n; vs. calculation,  (see alsocalculation); in company of signiﬁ-cant others, ; “copresence” and,, ; expecting abstractions tobreak down and, ; vs. humanexceptionalism, ; “inheritinghistories” and, , –; killingand, –, ; as learning tolearn, n; “the open” and, ,n; vs. reaction, , –; asrelationship vs. self-similarity, (see alsointra-action); relations ofuse and, . See alsocompanionspecies; “inheriting histories”;open, theresponsibility (“response-ability”). See“response”restoration projects: in Australia, ,; Navajo-Churro sheep, ;response to “inheriting histories,”Richards, Pam, , –, nRico (dog): “fast mapping” of wordsto objects, n“right to health”: dogs and, risk: of “muddle” (Bateson), ; playand, –, –, ; propo-sition and, ; of “wandering”(Stengers; Whitehead), . Seealsoopen, the; trustRitvo, Harriet, nRoland (dog), , –, , –, –n; comforting touchand, –; enforcer, –, ;“interesting mistakes” and, ; asmeta-retriever, –Roodeplaat Breeding Enterprises, Rorem, Linda, Rose, Deborah Bird, n;Aborigines and naturecultures inAustralia, n; on dingoes,n; Dingo Makes Us Human,n; Reports from a WildCountry,n, nRowell, Thelma, n; forestbaboons, , n; messmates,; sheep, –, n; surpriseand “being social,” ; twenty-thirdbowl, ; worldly politeness, Rubin, Lionel, Rush, Kristin, Russell, Edmund: on organisms asbiotechnologies, 418dINDEX




Russell, Robert Jay, –Rutherford, Suze, Ryder, M. L., nsacriﬁce: Christian narrative and, ,n; humanist logic of, –,n. See alsologic of sacriﬁce;scapegoatSaﬁ (dog) and Wister (donkey):cross-species play, –, ,, ; friendship and trust, ,, ; raiding predator-preyrepertoire to play, –Sandoval, Chela: Methodology of theOppressed,n, n“saving a genetic life” (LazaronBioTechnologies): right-to-lifediscourse and, , , nscapegoat: Animal as, ; Jesus as,n. See alsosacriﬁceSchjelderup-Ebbe, Thorleif, Schmutz, Sheila, , n, nSchrader, Astrid, , n, nscientist-entrepreneurs, n,nScott, John Paul, and John L. Fuller:dog genetics and social behaviorstudies, ; Genetics and Social Behavior of the Dog,n, nScott, Ziji, secularism: sacriﬁce stories and,nself-reference: replaced by self-other-reference, nSelinger, Evan, “sharing suﬀering,” n; asymmetryand, –, ; epistemologicaland practical, ; with lab animals,–, –; nonmimetic, –,, n. See alsocareShark Bay: Aboriginal peoples and,–n; Crittercam and, Sharp, C. A., –, , ,n, n; ASHGI (seeAustralian Shepherd Health andGenetics Institute); awards, n;campaign against epilepsy inAustralian shepherd dogs, –;collaborations with scientists, ,, , –, , n;collie eye anomaly in Australianshepherd dogs, –; earlyactivism silenced, – (see also“Incorrigibles, the”; “Ostrich Syn-drome”); expertise, multiple, ,–; genetic diversity andCANGEN-L, – (see alsoCANGEN-L); health archives,n; “knowing more at the endof the day,” ; “popular sire syn-drome” criticized in DHNN,,n (see alsoDouble HelixNetwork News);mediating scientiﬁcand lay communities, –;pedigree analysis service, ;practice of conﬁdentiality, ,n; risks of sharing data,n; “The Road to Hell,” .See alsogenetic diseases in dogs;genetic diversity in dog breedssheep, , –, ; bred for herdingtrials, n; Civil War and, ;Gold Rush and, , ; herdingdogs and movements of, –;history with human beings, n;meat and ﬁber trade, n;INDEXd419




naturalcultural ecologies of, n;Ramadan, supplied for, n;Spanish missions and, –. SeealsoChurro sheep; Navajo sheep;Rowell, Thelma; Soay sheepsheepdogs, , n; Churro sheepand, –; trials, n. Seealsoherding dogsshelter dogs. SeemuttsShock and Awe: War on Words(Eekelen et al.), nShotwell, Alexis, nshow culture, animal, n“signiﬁcant otherness”: signifyingothers and, . See also “signiﬁcantothers”“signiﬁcant others”: ﬂourishing and, (see also“politics”); killing and,; vs. Other, the, ; relations ofuse and, ; “response-ability” and,, ; signiﬁcant otherness and,. See alsocompanion speciesSisler, Jay, ; dogs and origins ofAustralian shepherd dogs, –;positive training methods, nsituated knowledge: Derrida, ;feminist standpoint theory,nslaughter. Seekillingsleeping sickness, nSmith, Paige, and Charles Daniel:Chicken Book, The,n, nSmuts, Barbara, , , n,n, n, n; “becom-ing with” baboons and respect, –; “copresence” with animals assomething tasted, ; “EmbodiedCommunication in NonhumanAnimals,” , n; “Encounterswith Animal Minds,” , n;“friendship” as term in primateﬁeld studies, n; truth andembodied communication, –Snuppy (dog), , nSoay sheep,, n, nSojourner (dog), South Africa, –species: each, as multispecies crowd,; etymology, –; introduced,–; Real Presence, .See alsoendangered speciesSpecies Survival Plans, –Sperling, John, nSpivak, Gayatri, nSquier, Susan, nstandardization: chickens and eggs,, n; dogs, n; sheep,; “torque” and, standpoint theory, feminist, nStanley, Eric, nSteeves, H. Peter: “Lost Dog” (onLévinas’s Bobby), nstem cells: Snuppy (dog), , nStengers, Isabelle, n, –n; cosmopolitics, , , ,, n; Deleuze’s idiot and,; on Freud’s historical wounds,n; Latour and, n;Penser Avec Whitehead,n;on Whitehead’s proposition, ,– (see alsopropositions;worlding). See alsocosmopoliticsStewart, Kathleen, nstories: “re-membering,” “Strange Fruit” (Holliday), nStrum, Shirley, n; “friendship”as term in primate ﬁeld studies,n420dINDEX




subject categories, sublime. Seeordinary, thesuﬀering, , n; asymmetrical,–, ; curiosity and caring inrecognizing, n; of dogs andProzac, –; hunting and, ;objective measures of, n;relief of, vs. ﬂourishing, ;universal, discourse of, . See also“sharing suﬀering”Sundberg, Juanita, Sunder Rajan, Kaushik: Biocapital,nsurprise in relationship, Surrogate (for the Northern Hairy-Nosed Wombat)(Piccinini), .See alsosurrogate species surrogates. Seescapegoat; surrogatespeciessurrogate species (Piccinini): humansand, –; surrogate wombatreproduction and, –sustainability, , Sutherland, Amy: Kicked, Bitten, andScratched,nSwanson, Heather, nsymbiogenesis: deﬁned, ; incompat-ible with autopoesis, .See alsoMargulis, Lynnsymbiosis: as creative force, , ;indigestion and, tail docking: in Australian shepherddogs, nTasha (dog): dog genome project,nTay-Sachs disease, ; screeningfor, among Ashkenazi Jews,ntechnoculture: agropastoralismin, , , , –n;entanglements in, –;images, , n; “lay” people asknowledgeable actors in, ;“technopresent” in, technologies: as compound(composite/enclosure), ;as “infoldings of the ﬂesh”(Merleau-Ponty), ; knots ofintimate and public, ; aspartners, . See also“bodies intechnologies”“technopresent”: apocalypse and, ;emergence vs., ; “revolutions”in, teleology: challenges to, –, ,n“therianthropism” (Wedde), ntherio-anthropo-morphism, ntheriomorphism: and anthropo-morphism, , n“things” (Latour), n; asinfolding of others to one another,Thompson (Cussins), Charis: Confessions of a Bioterrorist,” ;Making Parents,–, n;“When Elephants Stand forCompeting Philosophies ofNature,” n. See also“onto-logical choreography”Thorpe-Vargas, Susan, tigers: Species Survival Plans and,–; Zoo Ark, time: opening up in play, –;shared experience of, Wedde on,; temporal sequencing, alteredin play, –INDEXd421




Tiptree, James, Jr. (Alice Sheldon,Racoona Sheldon), –,n, nToby (dog), –. See alsoepilepsyin Australian shepherd dogsToby’s Foundation, –. See alsoepilepsy in Australian shepherddogs; Toby“torque” (Bowker and Starr), ; ofdiscourses of genetic diversity anddog breeders’ practices, touch: accountability and, , –,–; dog-human, and comfort,–; dog-human, in prisons, ;inheriting histories of, –, (see also“inheriting histories”); optic-haptic (see“ﬁngery eyes”); worldly,. See alsocompanion speciestraining. See agility training; animaltraining; behaviorism; dogtraining; positive training“truck,” ntrust: naturalcultural evolution of,. See alsocompanion species;open, the; risk truth. SeehonestyTsing, Anna: Friction,; humannature as interspecies relationship,, ; hyperexploitation, n;“Unruly Edges: Mushrooms asCompanion Species,” , ,n; “weediness” and contactzones, Tsitsikamma Wolf Sanctuary (SouthAfrica), –Turkish Akbash dogs: brought byIsraeli ranchers to Golan Heights,–; in United States, turtles, , , n, n;Crittercam and, , , , “turtles all the way down,” , n,–n, n; companion-species worlding, ; meetings in con- tact zones, ; recursivity and, “twenty-third bowl,” ; as “the open,”. See alsoRowell, Thelma“unfree”: lab animals, –; andreaction vs. response, . See also“degrees of freedom”value: breedwealth and, ; cachet of“endangered species,” –; ofdogs (seedogs). See also“encountervalue”; Marx, Karlvan Dooren, Thom: and “sharingsuﬀering,” nveganism, n; extermination ofdomestic animals, ; hunting and,on love of animals, ; as witness,.See alsoAdams, CarolVerran, Helen: on Aboriginalknowledge practices, nveterinarians: family making and, ;killing and, –; research, ;standards of care, , ; training,, nViaGen, , n, nVincent (dog), n, nVitruvian Man(da Vinci): humanistﬁgure in biotechnology, Wachtel, Hellmuth, Waddington, C. H.: chreodes anddevelopmental interactions,n422dINDEX




Warkentin, Traci, nWatanabe, Jennifer, nWeaver, Mary, nWedde, Ian, , , n; onanimal happiness, n; on riskof play, ; on shared time, –; “therianthropism,” n“we have never been human” concept,nWeisser, Linda, , n; “love ofthe breed,” ; struggle for opencanine health registries, Westhusin, Mark, whales: Crittercam and, , –,nwheelchairs: as actors n; as part-ners in companion-species relation-ships (seeHaraway, Frank Outten)White, Elizabeth, and Martha Root,nWhitehead, Alfred North: abstrac-tions as lures, ; concrescence ofprehensions, , n; propositionas opening,  (see alsoworlding);Science and the Modern World,n“wicked action,” , , , , , ,, n; and forgiveness, Wilbert, Chris, nWildhagen, Phil, Willem (dog), , , n,n; invented sex play withCayenne (dog), –Wilmut, Ian: on human cloning, Winance, Miriam, nWister (donkey). SeeSaﬁ (dog) andWister (donkey)wolf-dog hybrids, , ; bred tohunt insurgents in South Africa,–Wolfe, Cary, n, n,n; Animal Rites,n; oncommunication, n; “In theShadow of Wittgenstein’s Lion,”n; nonrepresentationalistcommunication, n; on rightsdiscourses, n; subjectivityshared between service dog andblind human, n; on TempleGrandin, nWolf Man: Freud’s analysis critiquedby Deleuze and Guattari, –wolves, –, , n; Akbashlivestock guardian dogs in GolanHeights and, , n; GreatPyrenees livestock guardian dogsin the Alps and, wombat, northern hairy-nosed, ,, , n–; introducedspecies and, ; reproduction in,. See alsoPiccinini, Patricia;surrogate species working dogs: coordinatedperformaces with humans, n;emergence, n. See alsoherdingdogs; livestock guardian dogsworlding, ; reworlding and, .See also“becoming with”;cosmopolitics; entanglementworldliness. See“becoming worldly”zoos: animal training and, ;compulsory reproductivebiopolitics and, INDEXd423




This page intentionally left blank 




Donna J. Harawayis a professor in the History ofConsciousness Department at the University of Cali-fornia, Santa Cruz. She is the author of The CompanionSpecies Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Signiﬁcant OthernessandSimians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention ofNature.




