Marx/Engels Internet Archive

A Critique ofThe German Ideology

Written: Fall 1845 to mid-1846First Published: 1932 (in full)Source: Progress Publishers, 1968Language: GermanTranscription: Tim Delaney, Bob SchwartzOnline Version: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000

 

PrefaceI. Feuerbach: Opposition of the Materialist and Idealist Outlooks

A. Idealism and Materialism

The Illusions of German Ideology

First Premises of the Materialist Method

History: Fundamental Conditions

Private Property and Communism

B. The Illusion of the Epoch

Civil Society -- and the Conception of History

Feuerbach: Philosophic, and Real, Liberation

Ruling Class and Ruling Ideas

C. The Real Basis of Ideology

Division of Labor: Town and Country

The Rise of Manufacturing

The Relation of State and Law to Property

D. Proletarians and Communism

Individuals, Class, and Community

Forms of Intercourse

Conquest

The German Ideologyhttp://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/index.htm (1 of 2) [23/08/2000 16:33:47]




Contradictions of Big Industry: Revolution III. Saint Max

A. Idealist mistakes & Materialist corrections

Idealist Misconceptions

Individuality according to Materialism

The Family, Alienation, Competition, etc. 

Marx/Engels Works Archive

The German Ideologyhttp://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/index.htm (2 of 2) [23/08/2000 16:33:47]




Karl MarxTHE GERMAN IDEOLOGY

PREFACE

 Hitherto men have constantly made up for themselves false conceptions about themselves, about whatthey are and what they ought to be. They have arranged their relationships according to their ideas ofGod, of normal man, etc. The phantoms of their brains have got out of their hands. They, the creators,have bowed down before their creations. Let us liberate them from the chimeras, the ideas, dogmas,imaginary beings under the yoke of which they are pining away. Let us revolt against the rule ofthoughts. Let us teach men, says one, to exchange these imaginations for thoughts which correspond tothe essence of man; says the second, to take up a critical attitude to them; says the third, to knock themout of their heads; and -- existing reality will collapse.These innocent and childlike fancies are the kernel of the modern Young-Hegelian philosophy, which notonly is received by the German public with horror and awe, but is announced by our philosophic heroeswith the solemn consciousness of its cataclysmic dangerousness and criminal ruthlessness. The firstvolume of the present publication has the aim of uncloaking these sheep, who take themselves and aretaken for wolves; of showing how their bleating merely imitates in a philosophic form the conceptions ofthe German middle class; how the boasting of these philosophic commentators only mirrors thewretchedness of the real conditions in Germany. It is its aim to debunk and discredit the philosophicstruggle with the shadows of reality, which appeals to the dreamy and muddled German nation.Once upon a time a valiant fellow had the idea that men were drowned in water only because they werepossessed with the idea of gravity. If they were to knock this notion out of their heads, say by stating it tobe a superstition, a religious concept, they would be sublimely proof against any danger from water. Hiswhole life long he fought against the illusion of gravity, of whose harmful results all statistic brought himnew and manifold evidence. This valiant fellow was the type of the new revolutionary philosophers inGermany.

Next Section

Table of Contents for The German Ideology

Marxist Writers Archive

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/preface.htm [23/08/2000 16:33:48]




Karl MarxTHE GERMAN IDEOLOGY

Part IFEUERBACH.OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALISTAND IDEALIST OUTLOOK

A. IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM

 The Illusions of German IdeologyAs we hear from German ideologists, Germany has in the last few years gone through an unparalleledrevolution. The decomposition of the Hegelian philosophy, which began with Strauss, has developed intoa universal ferment into which all the "powers of the past" are swept. In the general chaos mightyempires have arisen only to meet with immediate doom, heroes have emerged momentarily only to behurled back into obscurity by bolder and stronger rivals. It was a revolution beside which the FrenchRevolution was child's play, a world struggle beside which the struggles of the Diadochi [successors ofAlexander the Great] appear insignificant. Principles ousted one another, heroes of the mind overthreweach other with unheard-of rapidity, and in the three years 1842-45 more of the past was swept away inGermany than at other times in three centuries.All this is supposed to have taken place in the realm of pure thought.Certainly it is an interesting event we are dealing with: the putrescence of the absolute spirit. When thelast spark of its life had failed, the various components of this caput mortuum began to decompose,entered into new combinations and formed new substances. The industrialists of philosophy, who tillthen had lived on the exploitation of the absolute spirit, now seized upon the new combinations. Eachwith all possible zeal set about retailing his apportioned share. This naturally gave rise to competition,which, to start with, was carried on in moderately staid bourgeois fashion. Later when the Germanmarket was glutted, and the commodity in spite of all efforts found no response in the world market, thebusiness was spoiled in the usual German manner by fabricated and fictitious production, deterioration inquality, adulteration of the raw materials, falsification of labels, fictitious purchases, bill-jobbing and acredit system devoid of any real basis. The competition turned into a bitter struggle, which is now beingextolled and interpreted to us as a revolution of world significance, the begetter of the most prodigiousresults and achievements.If we wish to rate at its true value this philosophic charlatanry, which awakens even in the breast of thehonest German citizen a glow of national pride, if we wish to bring out clearly the pettiness, the parochialnarrowness of this whole Young-Hegelian movement and in particular the tragicomic contrast betweenthe illusions of these heroes about their achievements and the actual achievements themselves, we mustlook at the whole spectacle from a standpoint beyond the frontiers of Germany.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (1 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




German criticism has, right up to its latest efforts, never quitted the realm of philosophy. Far fromexamining its general philosophic premises, the whole body of its inquiries has actually sprung from thesoil of a definite philosophical system, that of Hegel. Not only in their answers but in their very questionsthere was a mystification. This dependence on Hegel is the reason why not one of these modern criticshas even attempted a comprehensive criticism of the Hegelian system, however much each professes tohave advanced beyond Hegel. Their polemics against Hegel and against one another are confined to this-- each extracts one side of the Hegelian system and turns this against the whole system as well as againstthe sides extracted by the others. To begin with they extracted pure unfalsified Hegelian categories suchas "substance" and "self-consciousness", later they desecrated these categories with more secular namessuch as species "the Unique", "Man", etc.The entire body of German philosophical criticism from Strauss to Stirner is confined to criticism ofreligious conceptions. The critics started from real religion and actual theology. What religiousconsciousness and a religious conception really meant was determined variously as they went along.Their advance consisted in subsuming the allegedly dominant metaphysical, political, juridical, moraland other conceptions under the class of religious or theological conceptions; and similarly inpronouncing political, juridical, moral consciousness as religious or theological, and the political,juridical, moral man -- "man" in the last resort -- as religious. The dominance of religion was taken forgranted. Gradually every dominant relationship was pronounced a religious relationship and transformedinto a cult, a cult of law, a cult of the State, etc. On all sides it was only a question of dogmas and beliefin dogmas. The world was sanctified to an ever-increasing extent till at last our venerable Saint Max wasable to canonise it en bloc and thus dispose of it once for all.The Old Hegelians had comprehended everything as soon as it was reduced to an Hegelian logicalcategory. The Young Hegelians criticised everything by attributing to it religious conceptions or bypronouncing it a theological matter. The Young Hegelians are in agreement with the Old Hegelians intheir belief in the rule of religion, of concepts, of a universal principle in the existing world. Only, theone party attacks this dominion as usurpation. while the other extols it as legitimate.Since the Young Hegelians consider conceptions, thoughts, ideas, in fact all the products ofconsciousness, to which they attribute an independent existence, as the real chains of men (just as the OldHegelians declared them the true bonds of human society) it is evident that the Young Hegelians have tofight only against these illusions of consciousness. Since, according to their fantasy, the relationships ofmen, all their doings, their chains and their limitations are products of their consciousness, the YoungHegelians logically put to men the moral postulate of exchanging their present consciousness for human,critical or egoistic consciousness, and thus of removing their limitations. This demand to changeconsciousness amounts to a demand to interpret reality in another way, i.e. to recognise it by means ofanother interpretation. The Young-Hegelian ideologists, in spite of their allegedly "world-shattering"statements, are the staunchest conservatives. The most recent of them have found the correct expressionfor their activity when they declare they are only fighting against "phrases". They forget, however, that tothese phrases they themselves are only opposing other phrases, and that they are in no way combating thereal existing world when they are merely combating the phrases of this world. The only results which thisphilosophic criticism could achieve were a few (and at that thoroughly one-sided) elucidations ofChristianity from the point of view of religious history; all the rest of their assertions are only furtherembellishments of their claim to have furnished, in these unimportant elucidations, discoveries ofuniversal importance.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (2 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




It has not occurred to any one of these philosophers to inquire into the connection of German philosophywith German reality, the relation of their criticism to their own material surroundings.First Premises of Materialist MethodThe premises from which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogmas, but real premises from whichabstraction can only be made in the imagination. They are the real individuals, their activity and thematerial conditions under which they live, both those which they find already existing and thoseproduced by their activity. These premises can thus be verified in a purely empirical way.The first premise of all human history is, of course, the existence of living human individuals. Thus thefirst fact to be established is the physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relationto the rest of nature. Of course, we cannot here go either into the actual physical nature of man, or intothe natural conditions in which man finds himself -- geological, hydrographical, climatic and so on. Thewriting of history must always set out from these natural bases and their modification in the course ofhistory through the action of men.Men can be distinguished from animals by consciousness, by religion or anything else you like. Theythemselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means ofsubsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation. By producing their means ofsubsistence men are indirectly producing their actual material life.The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of all on the nature of the actualmeans of subsistence they find in existence and have to reproduce. This mode of production must not beconsidered simply as being the production of the physical existence of the individuals. Rather it is adefinite form of activity of these individuals, a definite form of expressing their life, a definite mode oflife on their part. As individuals express their life, so they are. What they are, therefore, coincides withtheir production, both with what they produce and with how they produce. The nature of individuals thusdepends on the material conditions determining their production.This production only makes its appearance with the increase of population. In its turn this presupposesthe intercourse [Verkehr]1 of individuals with one another. The form of this intercourse is againdetermined by production.The relations of different nations among themselves depend upon the extent to which each has developedits productive forces, the division of labour and internal intercourse. This statement is generallyrecognised. But not only the relation of one nation to others, but also the whole internal structure of thenation itself depends on the stage of development reached by its production and its internal and externalintercourse. How far the productive forces of a nation are developed is shown most manifestly by thedegree to which the division of labour has been carried. Each new productive force, insofar as it is notmerely a quantitative extension of productive forces already known (for instance the bringing intocultivation of fresh land), causes a further development of the division of labour.The division of labour inside a nation leads at first to the separation of industrial and commercial fromagricultural labour, and hence to the separation of town and country and to the conflict of their interests.Its further development leads to the separation of commercial from industrial labour. At the same time

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (3 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




through the division of labour inside these various branches there develop various divisions among theindividuals co-operating in definite kinds of labour. The relative position of these individual groups isdetermined by the methods employed in agriculture, industry and commerce (patriarchalism, slavery,estates, classes). These same conditions are to be seen (given a more developed intercourse) in therelations of different nations to one another.The various stages of development in the division of labour are just so many different forms ofownership, i.e. the existing stage in the division of labour determines also the relations of individuals toone another with reference to the material, instrument, and product of labour.The first form of ownership is tribal [Stammeigentum]1 ownership. It corresponds to the undevelopedstage of production, at which a people lives by hunting and fishing, by the rearing of beasts or, in thehighest stage, agriculture. In the latter case it presupposes a great mass of uncultivated stretches of land.The division of labour is at this stage still very elementary and is confined to a further extension of thenatural division of labour existing in the family. The social structure is, therefore, limited to an extensionof the family; patriarchal family chieftains, below them the members of the tribe, finally slaves. Theslavery latent in the family only develops gradually with the increase of population, the growth of wants,and with the extension of external relations, both of war and of barter.The second form is the ancient communal and State ownership which proceeds especially from the unionof several tribes into a city by agreement or by conquest, and which is still accompanied by slavery.Beside communal ownership we already find movable, and later also immovable, private propertydeveloping, but as an abnormal form subordinate to communal ownership. The citizens hold power overtheir labouring slaves only in their community, and on this account alone, therefore, they are bound to theform of communal ownership. It is the communal private property which compels the active citizens toremain in this spontaneously derived form of association over against their slaves. For this reason thewhole structure of society based on this communal ownership, and with it the power of the people,decays in the same measure as, in particular, immovable private property evolves. The division of labouris already more developed. We already find the antagonism of town and country; later the antagonismbetween those states which represent town interests and those which represent country interests, andinside the towns themselves the antagonism between industry and maritime commerce. The class relationbetween citizens and slaves is now completely developed.With the development of private property, we find here for the first time the same conditions which weshall find again, only on a more extensive scale, with modern private property. On the one hand, theconcentration of private property, which began very early in Rome (as the Licinian agrarian law proves 1) and proceeded very rapidly from the time of the civil wars and especially under the Emperors; on theother hand, coupled with this, the transformation of the plebeian small peasantry into a proletariat, which,however, owing to its intermediate position between propertied citizens and slaves, never achieved anindependent development.The third form of ownership is feudal or estate property. If antiquity started out from the town and itslittle territory, the Middle Ages started out from the country. This different starting-point was determinedby the sparseness of the population at that time, which was scattered over a large area and which receivedno large increase from the conquerors. In contrast to Greece and Rome, feudal development at the outset,therefore, extends over a much wider territory, prepared by the Roman conquests and the spread ofagriculture at first associated with it. The last centuries of the declining Roman Empire and its conquest

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (4 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




by the barbarians destroyed a number of productive forces; agriculture had declined, industry haddecayed for want of a market, trade had died out or been violently suspended, the rural and urbanpopulation had decreased. From these conditions and the mode of organisation of the conquestdetermined by them, feudal property developed under the influence of the Germanic militaryconstitution. Like tribal and communal ownership, it is based again on a community; but the directlyproducing class standing over against it is not, as in the case of the ancient community, the slaves, but theenserfed small peasantry. As soon as feudalism is fully developed, there also arises antagonism to thetowns. The hierarchical structure of land ownership, and the armed bodies of retainers associated with it,gave the nobility power over the serfs. This feudal organisation was, just as much as the ancientcommunal ownership, an association against a subjected producing class; but the form of association andthe relation to the direct producers were different because of the different conditions of production.This feudal system of land ownership had its counterpart in the towns in the shape of corporativeproperty, the feudal organisation of trades. Here property consisted chiefly in the labour of eachindividual person. The necessity for association against the organised robber-nobility, the need forcommunal covered markets in an age when the industrialist was at the same time a merchant, thegrowing competition of the escaped serfs swarming into the rising towns, the feudal structure of thewhole country: these combined to bring about the guilds. The gradually accumulated small capital ofindividual craftsmen and their stable numbers, as against the growing population, evolved the relation ofjourneyman and apprentice, which brought into being in the towns a hierarchy similar to that in thecountry.Thus the chief form of property during the feudal epoch consisted on the one hand of landed propertywith serf labour chained to it, and on the other of the labour of the individual with small capitalcommanding the labour of journeymen. The organisation of both was determined by the restrictedconditions of production -- the small-scale and primitive cultivation of the land, and the craft type ofindustry. There was little division of labour in the heyday of feudalism. Each country bore in itself theantithesis of town and country; the division into estates was certainly strongly marked; but apart from thedifferentiation of princes, nobility, clergy and peasants in the country, and masters, journeymen,apprentices and soon also the rabble of casual labourers in the towns, no division of importance tookplace. In agriculture it was rendered difficult by the strip-system, beside which the cottage industry of thepeasants themselves emerged. In industry there was no division of labour at all in the individual tradesthemselves, and very little between them. The separation of industry and commerce was found already inexistence in older towns; in the newer it only developed later, when the towns entered into mutualrelations.The grouping of larger territories into feudal kingdoms was a necessity for the landed nobility as for thetowns. The organisation of the ruling class, the nobility, had, therefore, everywhere a monarch at itshead.The fact is, therefore, that definite individuals who are productively active in a definite way enter intothese definite social and political relations. Empirical observation must in each separate instance bringout empirically, and without any mystification and speculation, the connection of the social and politicalstructure with production. The social structure and the State are continually evolving out of thelife-process of definite individuals, but of individuals, not as they may appear in their own or otherpeople's imagination, but as they really are; i.e. as they operate, produce materially, and hence as theywork under definite material limits, presuppositions and conditions independent of their will.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (5 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at first directly interwoven with the materialactivity and the material intercourse of men, the language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, the mentalintercourse of men, appear at this stage as the direct efflux of their material behaviour. The same appliesto mental production as expressed in the language of politics, laws, morality, religion, metaphysics, etc.of a people. Men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc. -- real, active men, as they areconditioned by a definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse corresponding tothese, up to its furthest forms. Consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence, andthe existence of men is their actual life-process. If in all ideology men and their circumstances appearupside-down as in a camera obscura, this phenomenon arises just as much from their historicallife-process as the inversion of objects on the retina does from their physical life-process.In direct contrast to German philosophy which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earthto heaven. That is to say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine, conceive, nor from men asnarrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real,active men, and on the basis of their real life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideologicalreflexes and echoes of this life-process. The phantoms formed in the human brain are also, necessarily,sublimates of their material life-process, which is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises.Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness,thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development; but men,developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with this their realexistence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, butconsciousness by life. In the first method of approach the starting-point is consciousness taken as theliving individual; in the second method, which conforms to real life, it is the real living individualsthemselves, and consciousness is considered solely as their consciousness.This method of approach is not devoid of premises. It starts out from the real premises and does notabandon them for a moment. Its premises are men, not in any fantastic isolation and rigidity, but in theiractual, empirically perceptible process of development under definite conditions. As soon as this activelife-process is described, history ceases to be a collection of dead facts as it is with the empiricists(themselves still abstract), or an imagined activity of imagined subjects, as with the idealists.Where speculation ends -- in real life -- there real, positive science begins: the representation of thepractical activity, of the practical process of development of men. Empty talk about consciousnessceases, and real knowledge has to take its place. When reality is depicted, philosophy as an independentbranch of knowledge loses its medium of existence. At the best its place can only be taken by asumming-up of the most general results, abstractions which arise from the observation of the historicaldevelopment of men. Viewed apart from real history, these abstractions have in themselves no valuewhatsoever. They can only serve to facilitate the arrangement of historical material, to indicate thesequence of its separate strata. But they by no means afford a recipe or schema, as does philosophy, forneatly trimming the epochs of history. On the contrary, our difficulties begin only when we set about theobservation and the arrangement -- the real depiction -- of our historical material, whether of a past epochor of the present. The removal of these difficulties is governed by premises which it is quite impossibleto state here, but which only the study of the actual life-process and the activity of the individuals of eachepoch will make evident. We shall select here some of these abstractions, which we use incontradistinction to the ideologists, and shall illustrate them by historical examples.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (6 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




History: Fundamental ConditionsSince we are dealing with the Germans, who are devoid of premises, we must begin by stating the firstpremise of all human existence and, therefore, of all history, the premise, namely, that men must be in aposition to live in order to be able to "make history". But life involves before everything else eating anddrinking, a habitation, clothing and many other things. The first historical act is thus the production of themeans to satisfy these needs, the production of material life itself. And indeed this is an historical act, afundamental condition of all history, which today, as thousands of years ago, must daily and hourly befulfilled merely in order to sustain human life. Even when the sensuous world is reduced to a minimum,to a stick as with Saint Bruno [Bauer], it presupposes the action of producing the stick. Therefore in anyinterpretation of history one has first of all to observe this fundamental fact in all its significance and allits implications and to accord it its due importance. It is well known that the Germans have never donethis, and they have never, therefore, had an earthly basis for history and consequently never an historian.The French and the English, even if they have conceived the relation of this fact with so-called historyonly in an extremely one-sided fashion, particularly as long as they remained in the toils of politicalideology, have nevertheless made the first attempts to give the writing of history a materialistic basis bybeing the first to write histories of civil society, of commerce and industry.The second point is that the satisfaction of the first need (the action of satisfying, and the instrument ofsatisfaction which has been acquired) leads to new needs; and this production of new needs is the firsthistorical act. Here we recognise immediately the spiritual ancestry of the great historical wisdom of theGermans who, when they run out of positive material and when they can serve up neither theological norpolitical nor literary rubbish, assert that this is not history at all, but the "prehistoric era". They do not,however, enlighten us as to how we proceed from this nonsensical "prehistory" to history proper;although, on the other hand, in their historical speculation they seize upon this "prehistory" with especialeagerness because they imagine themselves safe there from interference on the part of "crude facts", and,at the same time, because there they can give full rein to their speculative impulse and set up and knockdown hypotheses by the thousand.The third circumstance which, from the very outset, enters into historical development, is that men, whodaily remake their own life, begin to make other men, to propagate their kind: the relation between manand woman, parents and children, the family. The family, which to begin with is the only socialrelationship, becomes later, when increased needs create new social relations and the increasedpopulation new needs, a subordinate one (except in Germany), and must then be treated and analysedaccording to the existing empirical data, not according to "the concept of the family", as is the custom in

Germany. [1] These three aspects of social activity are not of course to be taken as three different stages,but just as three aspects or, to make it clear to the Germans, three "moments", which have existedsimultaneously since the dawn of history and the first men, and which still assert themselves in historytoday.The production of life, both of one's own in labour and of fresh life in procreation, now appears as adouble relationship: on the one hand as a natural, on the other as a social relationship. By social weunderstand the co-operation of several individuals, no matter under what conditions, in what manner andto what end. It follows from this that a certain mode of production, or industrial stage, is alwayscombined with a certain mode of co-operation, or social stage, and this mode of co-operation is itself a

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (7 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




"productive force". Further, that the multitude of productive forces accessible to men determines thenature of society, hence, that the "history of humanity" must always be studied and treated in relation tothe history of industry and exchange. But it is also clear how in Germany it is impossible to write thissort of history, because the Germans lack not only the necessary power of comprehension and thematerial but also the "evidence of their senses", for across the Rhine you cannot have any experience ofthese things since history has stopped happening. Thus it is quite obvious from the start that there exists amaterialistic connection of men with one another, which is determined by their needs and their mode ofproduction, and which is as old as men themselves. This connection is ever taking on new forms, andthus presents a "history" independently of the existence of any political or religious nonsense which inaddition may hold men together.Only now, after having considered four moments, four aspects of the primary historical relationships, dowe find that man also possesses "consciousness", but, even so, not inherent, not "pure" consciousness.From the start the "spirit" is afflicted with the curse of being "burdened" with matter, which here makesits appearance in the form of agitated layers of air, sounds, in short, of language. Language is as old asconsciousness, language is practical consciousness that exists also for other men, and for that reasonalone it really exists for me personally as well; language, like consciousness, only arises from the need,the necessity, of intercourse with other men. Where there exists a relationship, it exists for me: the animaldoes not enter into "relations" with anything, it does not enter into any relation at all. For the animal, itsrelation to others does not exist as a relation. Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning asocial product, and remains so as long as men exist at all. Consciousness is at first, of course, merelyconsciousness concerning the immediate sensuous environment and consciousness of the limitedconnection with other persons and things outside the individual who is growing self-conscious. At thesame time it is consciousness of nature, which first appears to men as a completely alien, all-powerfuland unassailable force, with which men's relations are purely animal and by which they are overawedlike beasts; it is thus a purely animal consciousness of nature (natural religion) just because nature is asyet hardly modified historically. (We see here immediately: this natural religion or this particular relationof men to nature is determined by the form of society and vice versa. Here, as everywhere, the identity ofnature and man appears in such a way that the restricted relation of men to nature determines theirrestricted relation to one another, and their restricted relation to one another determines men's restrictedrelation to nature.) On the other hand, man's consciousness of the necessity of associating with theindividuals around him is the beginning of the consciousness that he is living in society at all. Thisbeginning is as animal as social life itself at this stage. It is mere herd- consciousness, and at this pointman is only distinguished from sheep by the fact that with him consciousness takes the place of instinctor that his instinct is a conscious one. This sheep-like or tribal consciousness receives its furtherdevelopment and extension through increased productivity, the increase of needs, and, what isfundamental to both of these, the increase of population. With these there develops the division of labour,which was originally nothing but the division of labour in the sexual act, then that division of labourwhich develops spontaneously or "naturally" by virtue of natural predisposition (e.g. physical strength),needs, accidents, etc. etc. Division of labour only becomes truly such from the moment when a divisionof material and mental labour appears. (The first form of ideologists, priests, is concurrent.) From thismoment onwards consciousness can really flatter itself that it is something other than consciousness 'ofexisting practice, that it really represents something without representing something real; from now onconsciousness is in a position to emancipate itself from the world and to proceed to the formation of"pure" theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc. But even if this theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc.comes into contradiction with the existing relations, this can only occur because existing social relations

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (8 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




have come into contradiction with existing forces of production; this, moreover, can also occur in aparticular national sphere of relations through the appearance of the contradiction, not within the nationalorbit, but between this national consciousness and the practice of other nations, i.e. between the nationaland the general consciousness of a nation (as we see it now in Germany).Moreover, it is quite immaterial what consciousness starts to do on its own: out of all such muck we getonly the one inference that these three moments, the forces of production, the state of society, andconsciousness, can and must come into contradiction with one another, because the division of labourimplies the possibility, nay the fact that intellectual and material activity -- enjoyment and labour,production and consumption -- devolve on different individuals, and that the only possibility of their notcoming into contradiction lies in the negation in its turn of the division of labour. It is self-evident,moreover, that "spectres", "bonds", "the higher being", "concept", "scruple", are merely the idealistic,spiritual expression, the conception apparently of the isolated individual, the image of very empiricalfetters and limitations, within which the mode of production of life and the form of intercourse coupledwith it move.Private Property and CommunismWith the division of labour, in which all these contradictions are implicit, and which in its turn is basedon the natural division of labour in the family and the separation of society into individual familiesopposed to one another, is given simultaneously the distribution, and indeed the unequal distribution,both quantitative and qualitative, of labour and its products, hence property: the nucleus, the first form, ofwhich lies in the family, where wife and children are the slaves of the husband. This latent slavery in thefamily, though still very crude, is the first property, but even at this early stage it corresponds perfectly tothe definition of modern economists who call it the power of disposing of the labour-power of others.Division of labour and private property are, moreover, identical expressions: in the one the same thing isaffirmed with reference to activity as is affirmed in the other with reference to the product of the activity.Further, the division of labour implies the contradiction between the interest of the separate individual orthe individual family and the communal interest of all individuals who have intercourse with one another.And indeed, this communal interest does not exist merely in the imagination, as the "general interest",but first of all in reality, as the mutual interdependence of the individuals among whom the labour isdivided. And finally, the division of labour offers us the first example of how, as long as man remains innatural society, that is, as long as a cleavage exists between the particular and the common interest, aslong, therefore, as activity is not voluntarily, but naturally, divided, man's own deed becomes an alienpower opposed to him, which enslaves him instead of being controlled by him. For as soon as thedistribution of labour comes into being, each man has a particular, exclusive sphere of activity, which isforced upon him and from which he cannot escape. He is a hunter, a fisherman, a herdsman, or a criticalcritic, and must remain so if he does not want to lose his means of livelihood; while in communistsociety, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in anybranch he wishes, society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do onething today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in theevening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsmanor critic. This fixation of social activity, this consolidation of what we ourselves produce into an

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (9 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




objective power above us, growing out of our control, thwarting our expectations, bringing to naught our

calculations, is one of the chief factors in historical development up till now. [2]The social power, i.e., the multiplied productive force, which arises through the co-operation of differentindividuals as it is determined by the division of labour, appears to these individuals, since theirco-operation is not voluntary but has come about naturally, not as their own united power, but as an alienforce existing outside them, of the origin and goal of which they are ignorant, which they thus cannotcontrol, which on the contrary passes through a peculiar series of phases and stages independent of thewill and the action of man, nay even being the prime governor of these.How otherwise could for instance property have had a history at all, have taken on different forms, andlanded property, for example, according to the different premises given, have proceeded in France fromparcellation to centralisation in the hands of a few, in England from centralisation in the hands of a fewto parcellation, as is actually the case today? Or how does it happen that trade, which after all is nothingmore than the exchange of products of various individuals and countries, rules the whole world throughthe relation of supply and demand -- a relation which, as an English economist says, hovers over theearth like the fate of the ancients, and with invisible hand allots fortune and misfortune to men, sets upempires and overthrows empires, causes nations to rise and to disappear -- while with the abolition of thebasis of private property, with the communistic regulation of production (and, implicit in this, thedestruction of the alien relation between men and what they themselves produce), the power of therelation of supply and demand is dissolved into nothing, and men get exchange, production, the mode oftheir mutual relation, under their own control again?In history up to the present it is certainly an empirical fact that separate individuals have, with thebroadening of their activity into world-historical activity, become more and more enslaved under a poweralien to them (a pressure which they have conceived of as a dirty trick on the part of the so-calleduniversal spirit, etc.), a power which has become more and more enormous and, in the last instance, turnsout to be the world market. But it is just as empirically established that, by the overthrow of the existingstate of society by the communist revolution (of which more below) and the abolition of private propertywhich is identical with it, this power, which so baffles the German theoreticians, will be dissolved; andthat then the liberation of each single individual will be accomplished in the measure in which historybecomes transformed into world history. From the above it is clear that the real intellectual wealth of theindividual depends entirely on the wealth of his real connections. Only then will the separate individualsbe liberated from the various national and local barriers, be brought into practical connection with thematerial and intellectual production of the whole world and be put in a position to acquire the capacity toenjoy this all-sided production of the whole earth (the creations of man). All-round dependence, thisnatural form of the world-historical co-operation of individuals, will be transformed by this communistrevolution into the control and conscious mastery of these powers, which, born of the action of men onone another, have till now overawed and governed men as powers completely alien to them. Now thisview can be expressed again in speculative-idealistic, i.e. fantastic, terms as "self-generation of thespecies" ("society as the subject"), and thereby the consecutive series of interrelated individualsconnected with each other can be conceived as a single individual, which accomplishes the mystery ofgenerating itself. It is clear here that individuals certainly make one another, physically and mentally, butdo not make themselves.This "alienation" (to use a term which will be comprehensible to the philosophers) can, of course, only beabolished given two practical premises. For it to become an "intolerable" power, i.e. a power against

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (10 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




which men make a revolution, it must necessarily have rendered the great mass of humanity"propertyless", and produced, at the same time, the contradiction of an existing world of wealth andculture, both of which conditions presuppose a great increase in productive power, a high degree of itsdevelopment. And, on the other hand, this development of productive forces (which itself implies theactual empirical existence of men in their world-historical, instead of local, being) is an absolutelynecessary practical premise because without it want is merely made general, and with destitution thestruggle for necessities and all the old filthy business would necessarily be reproduced; and furthermore,because only with this universal development of productive forces is a universal intercourse betweenmen established, which produces in all nations simultaneously the phenomenon of the "propertyless"mass (universal competition), makes each nation dependent on the revolutions of the others, and finallyhas put world-historical, empirically universal individuals in place of local ones. Without this, (i)communism could only exist as a local event; (2) the forces of intercourse themselves could not havedeveloped as universal, hence intolerable powers: they would have remained home-bred conditionssurrounded by superstition; and (3) each extension of intercourse would abolish local communism.Empirically, communism is only possible as the act of the dominant peoples "all at once" andsimultaneously, which presupposes the universal development of productive forces and the worldintercourse bound up with communism. Moreover, the mass of propertyless workers -- the utterlyprecarious position of labour -- power on a mass scale cut off from capital or from even a limitedsatisfaction and, therefore, no longer merely temporarily deprived of work itself as a secure source of life-- presupposes the world market through competition. The proletariat can thus only existworld-historically, just as communism, its activity, can only have a "world-historical" existence.World-historical existence of individuals means existence of individuals which is directly linked up withworld history.Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which reality [will] haveto adjust itself. We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things. Theconditions of this movement result from the premises now in existence.

FOOTNOTES

[1] The building of houses. With savages each family has as a matter of course its own cave or hut likethe separate family tent of the nomads. This separate domestic economy is made only the more necessaryby the further development of private property. With the agricultural peoples a communal domesticeconomy is just as impossible as a communal cultivation of the soil. A great advance was the building oftowns. In all previous periods, however, the abolition of individual economy, which is inseparable fromthe abolition of private property, was impossible for the simple reason that the material conditionsgoverning it were not present. The setting-up of a communal domestic economy presupposes thedevelopment of machinery, of the use of natural forces and of many other productive forces -- e.g. ofwater-supplies, of gas-lighting, steam-heating, etc., the removal [of the antagonism] of town and country.Without these conditions a communal economy would not in itself form a new productive force; lackingany material basis and resting on a purely theoretical foundation, it would be a mere freak and would endin nothing more than a monastic economy -- What was possible can be seen in the towns brought aboutby condensation and the erection of communal buildings for various definite purposes (prisons, barracks,etc.). That the abolition of individual economy is inseparable from the abolition of the family isself-evident.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (11 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




[2] [This paragraph appears as a marginal note in the manuscript -- Ed.] And out of this verycontradiction between the interest of the individual and that of the community the latter takes anindependent form as the State, divorced from the real interests of individual and community, and at thesame time as an illusory communal life, always based, however, on the real ties existing in every familyand tribal conglomeration -- such as flesh and blood, language, division of labour on a larger scale, andother interests-and especially, as we shall enlarge upon later, on the classes, already determined by thedivision of labour, which in every such mass of men separate out, and of which one dominates all theothers. It follows from this that all struggles within the State, the struggle between democracy,aristocracy, and monarchy, the struggle for the franchise, etc., etc., are merely the illusory forms in whichthe real struggles of the different classes are fought out among one another (of this the Germantheoreticians have not the faintest inkling, although they have received a sufficient introduction to thesubject in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher and Die heilige Familie). Further, it follows that everyclass which is struggling for mastery, even when its domination, as is the case with the proletariat,postulates the abolition of the old form of society in its entirety and of domination itself, must firstconquer for itself political power in order to represent its interest in turn as the general interest, which inthe first moment it is forced to do. Just because individuals seek only their particular interest, whichfothem does not coincide with their communal interest (in fact the general is the illusory form ofcommunal life), the latter will be imposed on them as an interest "alien" to them, and "independent" ofthem as in its turn a particular, peculiar "general" interest; or they themselves must remain within thisdiscord, as in democracy. On the other hind, too, the practical struggle of these particular interests, whichconstantly really run counter to the communal and illusory communal interests, makes practicalintervention and control necessary through the illusory "general" interest in the form of the State.

Next Section

Table of Contents for The German Ideology

Marxist Writers Archive

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_a.htm (12 of 12) [23/08/2000 16:33:55]




Karl MarxTHE GERMAN IDEOLOGY

Part IFEUERBACH.OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALISTAND IDEALIST OUTLOOK

B. THE ILLUSION OF THE EPOCH

 Civil Society and the Conception of HistoryThe form of intercourse determined by the existing productive forces at all previous historical stages, andin its turn determining these, is civil society. The latter, as is clear from what we have said above, has asits premises and basis the simple family and the multiple, the so-called tribe, the more precisedeterminants of this society are enumerated in our remarks above. Already here we see how this civilsociety is the true source and theatre of all history, and how absurd is the conception of history heldhitherto, which neglects the real relationships and confines itself to high-sounding dramas of princes andstates.Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individuals within a definite stage of thedevelopment of productive forces. It embraces the whole commercial and industrial life of a given stageand, insofar, transcends the State and the nation, though, on the other hand again, it must assert itself inits foreign relations as nationality, and inwardly must organise itself as State. The word "civil society"[bürgerliche Gesellschaft] emerged in the eighteenth century, when property relationships had alreadyextricated themselves from the ancient and medieval communal society. Civil society as such onlydevelops with the bourgeoisie; the social organisation evolving directly out of production and commerce,which in all ages forms the basis of the State and of the rest of the idealistic superstructure, has, however,always been designated by the same name.History is nothing but the succession of the separate generations, each of which exploits the materials,the capital funds, the productive forces handed down to it by all preceding generations, and thus, on theone hand, continues the traditional activity in completely changed circumstances and, on the other,modifies the old circumstances with a completely changed activity. This can be speculatively distorted sothat later history is made the goal of earlier history, e.g. the goal ascribed to the discovery of America isto further the eruption of the French Revolution. Thereby history receives its own special aims andbecomes "a person rating with other persons" (to wit: "Self-Consciousness, Criticism, the Unique", etc.),while what is designated with the words "destiny", "goal", "germ", or "idea" of earlier history is nothingmore than an abstraction formed from later history, from the active influence which earlier historyexercises on later history.The further the separate spheres, which interact on one another, extend in the course of this development,

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (1 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




the more the original isolation of the separate nationalities is destroyed by the developed mode ofproduction and intercourse and the division of labour between various nations naturally brought forth bythese, the more history becomes world history. Thus, for instance, if in England a machine is invented,which deprives countless workers of bread in India and China, and overturns the whole form of existenceof these empires, this invention becomes a world-historical fact. Or again, take the case of sugar andcoffee which have proved their world-historical importance in the nineteenth century by the fact that thelack of these products, occasioned by the Napoleonic Continental System, caused the Germans to riseagainst Napoleon, and thus became the real basis of the glorious Wars of liberation of 1813. From this itfollows that this transformation of history into world history is not indeed a mere abstract act on the partof the "self-consciousness", the world spirit, or of any other metaphysical spectre, but a quite material,empirically verifiable act, an act the proof of which every individual furnishes as he comes and goes,eats, drinks and clothes himself.This conception of history depends on our ability to expound the real process of production, starting outfrom the material production of life itself, and to comprehend the form of intercourse connected with thisand created by this mode of production (i.e. civil society in its various stages), as the basis of all history;and to show it in its action as State, to explain all the different theoretical products and forms ofconsciousness, religion, philosophy, ethics, etc. etc. and trace their origins and growth from that basis; bywhich means, of course, the whole thing can be depicted in its totality (and therefore, too, the reciprocalaction of these various sides on one another). It has not, like the idealistic view of history, in every periodto look for a category, but remains constantly on the real ground of history; it does not explain practicefrom the idea but explains the formation of ideas from material practice; and accordingly it comes to theconclusion that all forms and products of consciousness cannot be dissolved by mental criticism, byresolution into "self-consciousness" or transformation into "apparitions", "spectres", "fancies", etc. butonly by the practical overthrow of the actual social relations which gave rise to this idealistic humbug;that not criticism but revolution is the driving force of history, also of religion, of philosophy and allother types of theory. It shows that history does not end by being resolved into "self-consciousness asspirit of the spirit", but that in it at each stage there is found a material result: a sum of productive forces,an historically created relation of individuals to nature and to one another, which is handed down to eachgeneration from its predecessor; a mass of productive forces, capital funds and conditions, which, on theone hand, is indeed modified by the new generation, but also on the other prescribes for it its conditionsof life and gives it a definite development, a special character. It shows that circumstances make men justas much as men make circumstances.This sum of productive forces, capital funds and social forms of intercourse, which every individual andgeneration finds in existence as something given, is the real basis of what the philosophers haveconceived as "substance" and "essence of man", and what they have deified and attacked; a real basiswhich is not in the least disturbed, in its effect and influence on the development of men, by the fact thatthese philosophers revolt against it as "self-consciousness" and the "Unique". These conditions of life,which different generations find in existence, decide also whether or not the periodically recurringrevolutionary convulsion will be strong enough to overthrow the basis of the entire existing system. Andif these material elements of a complete revolution are not present (namely, on the one hand the existingproductive forces, on the other the formation of a revolutionary mass, which revolts not only againstseparate conditions of society up till then, but against the very "production of life" till then, the "totalactivity" on which it was based), then, as far as practical development is concerned, it is absolutelyimmaterial whether the idea of this revolution has been expressed a hundred times already, as the history

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (2 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




of communism proves.In the whole conception of history up to the present this real basis of history has either been totallyneglected or else considered as a minor matter quite irrelevant to the course of history. History must,therefore, always be written according to an extraneous standard; the real production of life seems to beprimeval history, while the truly historical appears to be separated from ordinary life, somethingextra-superterrestrial. With this the relation of man to nature is excluded from history and hence theantithesis of nature and history is created. The exponents of this conception of history have consequentlyonly been able to see in history the political actions of princes and States, religious and all sorts oftheoretical struggles, and in particular in each historical epoch have had to share the illusion of thatepoch. For instance, if an epoch imagines itself to be actuated by purely "political" or "religious"motives, although "religion" and "politics" are only forms of its true motives, the historian accepts thisopinion. The "idea", the "conception" of the people in question about their real practice, is transformedinto the sole determining, active force, which controls and determines their practice. When the crudeform in which the division of labour appears with the Indians and Egyptians calls forth the caste-systemin their State and religion, the historian believes that the caste-system is the power which has producedthis crude social form. While the French and the English at least hold by the political illusion, which ismoderately close to reality, the Germans move in the realm of the "pure spirit", and make religiousillusion the driving force of history. The Hegelian philosophy of history is the last consequence, reducedto its "finest expression", of all this German historiography, for which it is not a question of real, noreven of political, interests, but of pure thoughts, which consequently must appear to Saint Bruno as aseries of "thoughts" that devour one another and are finally swallowed up in "self-consciousness". ------[(So-called objective historiography just consists in treating the historical conditions independent ofactivity. Reactionary character.) marginal note by Marx -- Ed.)Feuerbach: Philosophic, and Real, Liberation[. . . .] It is also clear from these arguments how grossly Feuerbach is deceiving himself when (Wigand'sVierteljahrsschrift, 1845, Band 2) by virtue of the qualification "common man" he declares himself acommunist, transforms the latter into a predicate of "man", and thereby thinks it possible to change theword "communist", which in the real world means the follower of a definite revolutionary party, into amere category. Feuerbach's whole deduction with regard to the relation of men to one another goes onlyso far as to prove that men need and always have needed each other. He wants to establish consciousnessof this fact, that is to say, like the other theorists, merely to produce a correct consciousness about anexisting fact; whereas for the real communist it is a question of overthrowing the existing state of things.We thoroughly appreciate, moreover, that Feuerbach, in endeavouring to produce consciousness of justthis fact, is going as far as a theorist possibly can, without ceasing to be a theorist and philosopher....As an example of Feuerbach's acceptance and at the same time misunderstanding of existing reality,which he still shares with our opponents, we recall the passage in the Philosophie der Zukunft where hedevelops the view that the existence of a thing or a man is at the same time its or his essence, that theconditions of existence, the mode of life and activity of an animal or human individual are those in whichits "essence" feels itself satisfied. Here every exception is expressly conceived as an unhappy chance, asan abnormality which cannot be altered. Thus if millions of proletarians feel by no means contented with

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (3 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




their living conditions, if their "existence" does not in the least correspond to their "essence", then,according to the passage quoted, this is an unavoidable misfortune, which must be borne quietly. Themillions of proletarians and communists, however, think differently and will prove this in time, whenthey bring their "existence" into harmony with their "essence" in a practical way, by means of arevolution. Feuerbach, therefore, never speaks of the world of man in such cases, but always takes refugein external nature, and moreover in nature which has not yet been subdued by men. But every newinvention, every advance made by industry, detaches another piece from this domain, so that the groundwhich produces examples illustrating such Feuerbachian propositions is steadily shrinking.[. . . .] We shall, of course, not take the trouble to enlighten our wise philosophers by explaining to themthat the "liberation" of man is not advanced a single step by reducing philosophy, theology, substanceand all the trash to "self-consciousness" and by liberating man from the domination of these phrases,which have never held him in thrall. Nor will we explain to them that it is only possible to achieve realliberation in the real world and by employing real means, that slavery cannot be abolished without thesteam-engine and the mule and spinning-jenny, serfdom cannot be abolished without improvedagriculture, and that, in general, people cannot be liberated as long as they are unable to obtain food anddrink, housing and clothing in adequate quality and quantity. "Liberation" is an historical and not amental act, and it is brought about by historical conditions, the development of industry, commerce,

agriculture, the conditions of intercourse. . . . [1]In Germany, a country where only a trivial historical development is taking place, these mentaldevelopments, these glorified and ineffective trivialities, naturally serve as a substitute for the lack ofhistorical development, and they take root and have to be combated. But this fight is of local importance.In reality and for the practical materialist, i.e. the communist, it is a question of revolutionising theexisting world, of practically attacking and changing existing things. When occasionally we find suchviews with Feuerbach, they are never more than isolated surmises and have much too little influence onhis general outlook to be considered here as anything else than embryos capable of development.Feuerbach's conception of the sensuous world is confined on the one hand to mere contemplation of it,and on the other to mere feeling; he says "Man" instead of "real historical man". "Man" is really "theGerman". In the first case, the contemplation of the sensuous world, he necessarily lights on things whichcontradict his consciousness and feeling, which disturb the harmony he presupposes, the harmony of allparts of the sensuous world and especially of man and nature. To remove this disturbance, he must takerefuge in a double perception, a profane one which only perceives the "flatly obvious" and a higher,philosophical, one which perceives the "true essence" of things. He does not see how the sensuous worldaround him is, not a thing given direct from all eternity, remaining ever the same, but the product ofindustry and of the state of society; and, indeed, in the sense that it is an historical product, the result ofthe activity of a whole succession of generations, each standing on the shoulders of the preceding one,developing its industry and its intercourse, modifying its social system according to the changed needs.Even the objects of the simplest "sensuous certainty" are only given him through social development,industry and commercial intercourse. The cherry-tree, like almost all fruit-trees, was, as is well known,only a few centuries ago transplanted by commerce into our zone, and therefore only by this action of adefinite society in a definite age it has become "sensuous certainty" for Feuerbach.Incidentally, when we conceive things thus, as they really are and happened, every profoundphilosophical problem is resolved, as will be seen even more clearly later, quite simply into an empiricalfact. For instance, the important question of the relation of man to nature (Bruno [Bauer] goes so far as to

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (4 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




speak of "the antitheses in nature and history" (p. 110), as though these were two separate "things" andman did not always have before him an historical nature and a natural history) out of which all the"unfathomably lofty works" on "substance" and "self-consciousness" were born, crumbles of itself whenwe understand that the celebrated "unity of man with nature" has always existed in industry and hasexisted in varying forms in every epoch according to the lesser or greater development of industry, justlike the "struggle" of man with nature, right up to the development of his productive powers on acorresponding basis. Industry and commerce, production and the exchange of the necessities of life,themselves determine distribution, the structure of the different social classes and are, in turn, determinedby it as to the mode in which they are carried on; and so it happens that in Manchester, for instance,Feuerbach sees only factories and machines, where a hundred years ago only spinning-wheels andweaving-rooms were to be seen, or in the Campagna of Rome he finds only pasture lands and swamps,where in the time of Augustus he would have found nothing but the vineyards and villas of Romancapitalists. Feuerbach speaks in particular of the perception of natural science; he mentions secrets whichare disclosed only to the eye of the physicist and chemist; but where would natural science be withoutindustry and commerce? Even this pure natural science is provided with an aim, as with its material, onlythrough trade and industry, through the sensuous activity of men. So much is this activity, this unceasingsensuous labour and creation, this production, the basis of the whole sensuous world as it now exists,that, were it interrupted only for a year, Feuerbach would not only find an enormous change in thenatural world, but would very soon find that the whole world of men and his own perceptive faculty, nayhis own existence, were missing. Of course, in all this the priority of external nature remains unassailed,and all this has no application to the original men produced by generatio aequivoca; [Spontaneousgeneration. -- Ed.] but this differentiation has meaning only insofar as man is considered to be distinctfrom nature. For that matter, nature, the nature that preceded human history, is not by any means thenature in which Feuerbach lives, it is nature which today no longer exists anywhere (except perhaps on afew Australian coral-islands of recent origin) and which, therefore, does not exist for Feuerbach.Certainly Feuerbach has a great advantage over the "pure" materialists in that he realises how man too isan "object of the senses. But apart from the fact that he only conceives him as an "object of the senses,not as sensuous activity", because he still remains in the realm of theory and conceives of men not intheir given social connection, not under their existing conditions of life, which have made them whatthey are, he never arrives at the really existing active men, but stops at the abstraction "man", and gets nofurther than recognising "the true,individual, corporeal man,' emotionally, i.e. he knows no other "human relationships" "of man to man"than love and friendship, and even then idealised. He gives no criticism of the present conditions of life.Thus he never manages to conceive the sensuous world as the total living sensuous activity of theindividuals composing it; and therefore when, for example, he sees instead of healthy men a crowd ofscrofulous, overworked and consumptive starvelings, he is compelled to take refuge in the "higherperception" and in the ideal "compensation in the species", and thus to relapse into idealism at the verypoint where the communist materialist sees the necessity, and at the same time the condition, of atransformation both of industry and of the social structure.As far as Feuerbach is a materialist he does not deal with history, and as far as he considers history he isnot a materialist. With him materialism and history diverge completely, a fact which incidentally isalready obvious from what has been said.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (5 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




Ruling Class and Ruling IdeasThe ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e. the class which is the ruling materialforce of society, is at the same time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means ofmaterial production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production, sothat thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subjectto it. The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships,the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas; hence of the relationships which make the one classthe ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its dominance. The individuals composing the ruling class possessamong other things consciousness, and therefore think. Insofar, therefore, as they rule as a class anddetermine the extent and compass of an epoch, it is self-evident that they do this in its whole range,hence among other things rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas, and regulate the production anddistribution of the ideas of their age: thus their ideas are the ruling ideas of the epoch. For instance, in anage and in a country where royal power, aristocracy, and bourgeoisie are contending for mastery andwhere, therefore, mastery is shared, the doctrine of the separation of powers proves to be the dominantidea and is expressed as an "eternal law".The division of labour, which we already saw above as one of the chief forces of history up till now,manifests itself also in the ruling class as the division of mental and material labour, so that inside thisclass one part appears as the thinkers of the class (its active, conceptive ideologists, who make theperfecting of the illusion of the class about itself their chief source of livelihood), while the others'attitude to these ideas and illusions is more passive and receptive, because they are in reality the activemembers of this class and have less time to make up illusions and ideas about themselves. Within thisclass this cleavage can even develop into a certain opposition and hostility between the two parts, which,however, in the case of a practical collision, in which the class itself is endangered, automatically comesto nothing, in which case there also vanishes the semblance that the ruling ideas were not the ideas of theruling class and had a power distinct from the power of this class. The existence of revolutionary ideas ina particular period presupposes the existence of a revolutionary class; about the premises for the lattersufficient has already been said above.If now in considering the course of history we detach the ideas of the ruling class from the ruling classitself and attribute to them an independent existence, if we confine ourselves to saying that these or thoseideas were dominant at a given time, without bothering ourselves about the conditions of production andthe producers of these ideas, if we thus ignore the individuals and world conditions which are the sourceof the ideas, we can say, for instance, that during the time that the aristocracy was dominant, the conceptshonour, loyalty, etc. were dominant, during the dominance of the bourgeoisie the concepts freedom,equality, etc. The ruling class itself on the whole Imagines this to be so. This conception of history,which is common to all historians, particularly since the eighteenth century, will necessarily come upagainst the phenomenon that increasingly abstract ideas hold sway, i.e. ideas which increasingly take onthe form of universality. For each new class which puts itself in the place of one ruling before it, iscompelled, merely in order to carry through its aim, to represent its interest as the common interest of allthe members of society, that is, expressed in ideal form: it has to give its ideas the form of universality,and represent them as the only rational, universally valid ones. The class making a revolution appearsfrom the very start, if only because it is opposed to a class, not as a class but as the representative of the

whole of society; it appears as the whole mass of society confronting the one ruling class. [2] It can do

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (6 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




this because, to start with, its interest really is more connected with the common interest of all othernon-ruling classes, because under the pressure of hitherto existing conditions its interest has not yet beenable to develop as the particular interest of a particular class. Its victory, therefore, benefits also manyindividuals of the other classes which are not winning a dominant position, but only insofar as it nowputs these individuals in a position to raise themselves into the ruling class. When the French bourgeoisieoverthrew the power of the aristocracy, it thereby made it possible for many proletarians to raisethemselves above the proletariat, but only insofar as they become bourgeois. Every new class, therefore,achieves its hegemony only on a broader basis than that of the class ruling previously, whereas theopposition of the non-ruling class against the new ruling class later develops all the more sharply andprofoundly. Both these things determine the fact that the struggle to be waged against this new rulingclass, in its turn, aims at a more decided and radical negation of the previous conditions of society thancould all previous classes which sought to rule.This whole semblance, that the rule of a certain class is only the rule of certain ideas, comes to a naturalend, of course, as soon as class rule in general ceases to be the form in which society is organised, that isto say, as soon as it is no longer necessary to represent a particular interest as general or the "generalinterest" as ruling.Once the ruling ideas have been separated from the ruling individuals and, above all, from therelationships which result from a given stage of the mode of production, and in this way the conclusionhas been reached that history is always under the sway of ideas, it is very easy to abstract from thesevarious ideas "the idea", the notion, etc. as the dominant force in history, and thus to understand all theseseparate ideas and concepts as "forms of self-determination" on the part of the concept developing inhistory. It follows then naturally, too, that all the relationships of men can be derived from the concept ofman, man as conceived, the essence of man, Man. This has been done by the speculative philosophers.Hegel himself confesses at the end of the Geschichtsphilosophie that he "has considered the progress ofthe concept only" and has represented in history the "true theodicy". (p.446.) Now one can go back againto the producers of the "concept", to the theorists, ideologists and philosophers, and one comes then tothe conclusion that the philosophers, the thinkers as such, have at all times been dominant in history: aconclusion, as we see, already expressed by Hegel. The whole trick of proving the hegemony of the spiritin history (hierarchy Stirner calls it) is thus confirmed to the following three efforts.No. 1. One must separate the ideas of those ruling for empirical reasons, under empirical conditions andas empirical individuals, from these actual rulers, and thus recognise the rule of ideas or illusions inhistory.No. 2. One must bring an order into this rule of ideas, prove a mystical connection among the successiveruling ideas, which is managed by understanding them as "acts of self-determination on the part of theconcept" (this is possible because by virtue of their empirical basis these ideas are really connected withone another and because, conceived as mere ideas, they become self-distinctions, distinctions made bythought).No. 3. To remove the mystical appearance of this "self-determining concept" it is changed into a person-- "Self-Consciousness" -- or, to appear thoroughly materialistic, into a series of persons, who representthe "concept" in history, into the "thinkers", the "philosophers", the ideologists, who again are understoodas the manufacturers of history, as the "council of guardians", as the rulers. Thus the whole body ofmaterialistic elements has been removed from history and now full rein can be given to the speculative

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (7 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




steed.Whilst in ordinary life every shopkeeper is very well able to distinguish between what somebodyprofesses to be and what he really is, our historians have not yet won even this trivial insight. They takeevery epoch at its word and believe that everything it says and imagines about itself is true.This historical method which reigned in Germany, and especially the reason why, must be understoodfrom its connection with the illusion of ideologists in general, e.g. the illusions of the jurist, politicians(of the practical statesmen among them, too), from the dogmatic dreamings and distortions of thesefellows; this is explained perfectly easily from their practical position in life, their job, and the division oflabour.

FOOTNOTES

1. There is here a gap in the manuscript.

2. [Marginal note by Marx:] Universality corresponds to (1) the class versus the estate, (2) thecompetition, world-wide intercourse, etc., (3) the great numerical strength of the ruling class, (4) theillusion of the common interests (in the beginning this illusion is true), (5) the delusion of the ideologistsand the division of labour.

Next Section

Table of Contents for The German Ideology

Marxist Writers Archive

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_b.htm (8 of 8) [23/08/2000 16:33:59]




Karl MarxTHE GERMAN IDEOLOGY

Part IFEUERBACH.OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALISTAND IDEALIST OUTLOOK

C. THE REAL BASIS OF IDEOLOGY

 Division of Labour: Town and Country

[. . . .] [1] From the first there follows the premise of a highly developed division of labour and anextensive commerce; from the second, the locality. In the first case the individuals must be broughttogether; in the second they find themselves alongside the given instrument of production as instrumentsof production themselves. Here, therefore, arises the difference between natural instruments ofproduction and those created by civilisation. The field (water, etc.) can be regarded as a naturalinstrument of production. In the first case, that of the natural instrument of production, individuals aresubservient to nature; in the second, to a product of labour. In the first case, therefore, property (landedproperty) appears as direct natural domination, in the second, as domination of labour, particularly ofaccumulated labour, capital. The first case presupposes that the individuals are united by some bond:family, tribe, the land itself, etc.; the second, that they are independent of one another and are only heldtogether by exchange. In the first case, what is involved is chiefly an exchange between men and naturein which the labour of the former is exchanged for the products of the latter; in the second, it ispredominantly an exchange of men among themselves. In the first case, average, human common senseis adequate -- physical activity is as yet not separated from mental activity; in the second, the divisionbetween physical and mental labour must already be practically completed. In the first case, thedomination of the proprietor over the propertyless may be based on a personal relationship, on a kind ofcommunity; in the second, it must have taken on a material shape in a third party-money. In the first case,small industry exists, but determined by the utilisation of the natural instrument of production andtherefore without the distribution of labour among various individuals; in the second, industry exists onlyin and through the division of labour.The greatest division of material and mental labour is the separation of town and country. Theantagonism between town and country begins with the transition from barbarism to civilisation, fromtribe to State, from locality to nation, and runs through the whole history of civilisation to the present day(the Anti-Corn Law League).The existence of the town implies, at the same time, the necessity of administration, police, taxes, etc.; inshort, of the municipality, and thus of politics in general. Here first became manifest the division of thepopulation into two great classes, which is directly based on the division of labour and on the instruments

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




of production. The town already is in actual fact the concentration of the population, of the instrumentsof production, of capital, of pleasures, of needs, while the country demonstrates just the opposite fact,isolation and separation. The antagonism between town and country can only exist within the frameworkof private property. It is the most crass expression of the subjection of the individual under the divisionof labour, under a definite activity forced upon him -- a subjection which makes one man into a restrictedtown-animal, the other into a restricted country-animal, and daily creates anew the conflict between theirinterests. Labour is here again the chief thing, power over individuals, and as long as the latter exists,private property must exist. The abolition of the antagonism between town and country is one of the firstconditions of communal life, a condition which again depends on a mass of material premises and whichcannot be fulfilled by the mere will, as anyone can see at the first glance. (These conditions have still tobe enumerated.) The separation of town and country can also be understood as the separation of capitaland landed property, as the beginning of the existence and development of capital independent of landedproperty -- the beginning of property having its basis only in labour and exchange.In the towns which, in the Middle Ages, did not derive ready-made from an earlier period but wereformed anew by the serfs who had become free, each man's own particular labour was his only propertyapart from the small capital he brought with him, consisting almost solely of the most necessary tools ofhis craft. The competition of serfs constantly escaping into the town, the constant war of the countryagainst the towns and thus the necessity of an organised municipal military force, the bond of commonownership in a particular kind of labour, the necessity of common buildings for the sale of their wares ata time when craftsmen were also traders, and the consequent exclusion of the unauthorised from thesebuildings, the conflict among the interests of the various crafts, the necessity of protecting theirlaboriously acquired skill, and the feudal organisation of the whole of the country: these were the causesof the union of the workers of each craft in guilds. We have not at this point to go further into themanifold modifications of the guild-system, which arise through later historical developments. The flightof the serfs into the towns went on without interruption right through the Middle Ages. These serfs,persecuted by their lords in the country, came separately into the towns, where they found an organisedcommunity, against which they were powerless and in which they had to subject themselves to thestation assigned to them by the demand for their labour and the interest of their organised urbancompetitors. These workers, entering separately, were never able to attain to any power, since, if theirlabour was of the guild type which had to be learned, the guild-masters bent them to their will andorganised them according to their interest; or if their labour was not such as had to be learned, andtherefore not of the guild type, they became day-labourers and never managed to organise, remaining anunorganised rabble. The need for day-labourers in the towns created the rabble.These towns were true "associations", called forth by the direct need, the care of providing for theprotection of property, and of multiplying the means of production and defence of the separate members.The rabble of these towns was devoid of any power, composed as it was of individuals strange to oneanother who had entered separately, and who stood unorganised over against an organised power, armedfor war, and jealously watching over them. The journeymen and apprentices were organised in each craftas it best suited the interest of the masters. The patriarchal relationship existing between them and theirmasters gave the latter a double power -- on the one hand because of their influence on the whole life ofthe journeymen, and on the other because, for the journeymen who worked with the same master, it wasa real bond which held them together against the journeymen of other masters and separated them fromthese. And finally, the journeymen were bound to the existing order by their simple interest in becomingmasters themselves. While, therefore, the rabble at least carried out revolts against the whole municipal

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




order, revolts which remained completely ineffective because of their powerlessness, the journeymennever got further than small acts of insubordination within separate guilds, such as belong to the verynature of the guild-system. The great risings of the Middle Ages all radiated from the country, butequally remained totally ineffective because of the isolation and consequent crudity of the peasants.In the towns, the division of labour between the individual guilds was as yet [quite naturally derived]and, in the guilds themselves, not at all developed between the individual workers. Every workman hadto be versed in a whole round of tasks, had to be able to make everything that was to be made with histools. The limited commerce and the scanty communication between the individual towns, the lack ofpopulation and the narrow needs did not allow of a higher division of labour, and therefore every manwho wished to become a master had to be proficient in the whole of his craft. Thus there is found withmedieval craftsmen an interest in their special work and in proficiency in it, which was capable of risingto a narrow artistic sense. For this very reason, however, every medieval craftsman was completelyabsorbed in his work, to which he had a contented, slavish relationship, and to which he was subjected toa far greater extent than the modern worker, whose work is a matter of indifference to him.Capital in these towns was a naturally derived capital, consisting of a house, the tools of the craft, and thenatural, hereditary customers; and not being realisable, on account of the backwardness of commerce andthe lack of circulation, it descended from father to son. Unlike modern capital, which can be assessed inmoney and which may be indifferently invested in this thing or that, this capital was directly connectedwith the particular work of the owner, inseparable from it and to this extent estate capital.The next extension of the division of labour was the separation of production and commerce, theformation of a special class of mer-chants; a separation which, in the towns bequeathed by a formerperiod, had been handed down (among other things with the Jews) and which very soon appeared in thenewly formed ones. With this there was given the possibility of commercial communicationstranscending the immediate neighbourhood, a possibility, the realisation of which depended on theexisting means of communication, the state of public safety in the countryside, which was determined bypolitical conditions (during the whole of the Middle Ages, as is well known, the merchants travelled inarmed caravans), and on the cruder or more advanced needs (determined by the stage of culture attained)of the region accessible to intercourse.With commerce the prerogative of a particular class, with the extension of trade through the merchantsbeyond the immediate surroundings of the town, there immediately appears a reciprocal action betweenproduction and commerce. The towns enter into relations with one another, new tools are brought fromone town into the other, and the separation between production and commerce soon calls forth a newdivision of production between the individual towns, each of which is soon exploiting a predominantbranch of industry. The local restrictions of earlier times begin gradually to be broken down.It depends purely on the extension of commerce whether the productive forces achieved in a locality,especially inventions, are lost for later development or not. As long as there exists no commercetranscending the immediate neighbourhood, every invention must be made separately in each locality,and mere chances such as irruptions of barbaric peoples, even ordinary wars, are sufficient to cause acountry with advanced productive forces and needs to have to start right over again from the beginning.In primitive history every invention had to be made daily anew and in each locality independently. Howlittle highly developed productive forces are safe from complete destruction, given even a relatively veryextensive commerce, is proved by the Phoenicians, whose inventions were for the most part lost for a

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




long time to come through the ousting of this nation from commerce, its conquest by Alexander and itsconsequent decline. Likewise, for instance, glass-painting in the Middle Ages. Only when commerce hasbecome world commerce and has as its basis large-scale industry, when all nations are drawn into thecompetitive struggle, is the permanence of the acquired productive forces assured.The Rise of ManufacturingThe immediate consequence of the division of labour between the various towns was the rise ofmanufactures, branches of production which had outgrown the guild-system. Manufactures firstflourished, in Italy and later in Flanders, under the historical premise of commerce with foreign nations.In other countries, England and France for example, manufactures were at first confined to the homemarket. Besides the premises already mentioned manufactures depend on an already advancedconcentration of population, particularly in the countryside, and of capital, which began to accumulate inthe hands of individuals, partly in the guilds in spite of the guild regulations, partly among the merchants.That labour which from the first presupposed a machine, even of the crudest sort, soon showed itself themost capable of development. Weaving, earlier carried on in the country by the peasants as a secondaryoccupation to procure their clothing, was the first labour to receive an impetus and a further developmentthrough the extension of commerce. Weaving was the first and remained the principal manufacture. Therising demand for clothing materials, consequent on the growth of population, the growing accumulationand mobilisation of natural capital through accelerated circulation, the demand for luxuries called forthby the latter and favoured generally by the gradual extension of commerce, gave weaving a quantitativeand qualitative stimulus, which wrenched it out of the form of production hitherto existing. Alongside thepeasants weaving for their own use, who continued, and still continue, with this sort of work, thereemerged a new class of weavers in the towns, whose fabrics were destined for the whole home marketand usually for foreign markets too.Weaving, an occupation demanding in most cases little skill and soon splitting up into countlessbranches, by its whole nature resisted the trammels of the guild. Weaving was, therefore, carried onmostly in villages and market-centres without guild organisation, which gradually became towns, andindeed the most flourishing towns in each land.With guild-free manufacture, property relations also quickly changed. The first advance beyond naturallyderived estate capital was provided by the rise of merchants whose capital was from the beginningmovable, capital in the modern sense as far as one can speak of it, given the circumstances of thosetimes. The second advance came with manufacture, which again made mobile a mass of natural capital,and altogether increased the mass of movable capital as against that of natural capital.At the same time, manufacture became a refuge of the peasants from the guilds which excluded them orpaid them badly, just as earlier the guild-towns had [served] as a refuge for the peasants from [theoppressive landed nobility].Simultaneously with the beginning of manufactures there was a period of vagabondage caused by theabolition of the feudal bodies of retainers, the disbanding of the swollen armies which had flocked toserve the kings against their vassals, the improvement of agriculture, and the transformation of greatstrips of tillage into pasture land. From this alone it is clear how this vagabondage is strictly connected

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




with the disintegration of the feudal system. As early as the thirteenth century we find isolated epochs ofthis kind, but only at the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth does this vagabondage makea general and permanent appearance. These vagabonds, who were so numerous that, for instance, HenryVIII of England had 72,000 of them hanged, were only prevailed upon to work with the greatestdifficulty and through the most extreme necessity, and then only after long resistance. The rapid rise ofmanufactures, particularly in England, absorbed them gradually.With the advent of manufactures, the various nations entered into a competitive relationship, the strugglefor trade, which was fought out in wars, protective duties and prohibitions, whereas earlier the nations,insofar as they were connected at all, had carried on an inoffensive exchange with each other. Trade hadfrom now on a political significance.With the advent of manufacture the relationship between worker and employer changed. In the guilds thepatriarchal relationship between journeyman and master continued to exist; in manufacture its place wastaken by the monetary relation between worker and capitalist -- a relationship which in the countrysideand in small towns retained a patriarchal tinge, but in the larger, the real manufacturing towns, quite earlylost almost all patriarchal complexion.Manufacture and the movement of production in general received an enormous impetus through theextension of commerce which came with the discovery of America and the sea-route to the East Indies.The new products imported thence, particularly the masses of gold and silver which came into circulationand totally changed the position of the classes towards one another, dealing a hard blow to feudal landedproperty and to the workers; the expeditions of adventurers, colonisation; and above all the extension ofmarkets into a world market, which had now become possible and was daily becoming more and more afact, called forth a new phase of historical development, into which in general we cannot here enterfurther. Through the colonisation of the newly discovered countries the commercial struggle of thenations amongst one another was given new fuel and accordingly greater extension and animosity.The expansion of trade and manufacture accelerated the accumu-lation of movable capital, while in theguilds, which were not stimulated to extend their production, natural capital remained stationary or evendeclined. Trade and manufacture created the big bourgeoisie; in the guilds was concentrated the pettybourgeoisie, which no longer was dominant in the towns as formerly, but had to bow to the might of thegreat merchants and manufacturers. Hence the decline of the guilds, as soon as they came into contactwith manufacture.The intercourse of nations took on, in the epoch of which we have been speaking, two different forms. Atfirst the small quantity of gold and silver in circulation involved the ban on the export of these metals;and industry, for the most part imported from abroad and made necessary by the need for employing thegrowing urban population, could not do without those privileges which could be granted not only, ofcourse, against home competition, but chiefly against foreign. The local guild privilege was in theseoriginal prohibitions extended over the whole nation. Customs duties originated from the tributes whichthe feudal lords exacted as protective levies against robbery from merchants passing through theirterritories, tributes later imposed likewise by the towns, and which, with the rise of the modern states,were the Treasury's most obvious means of raising money.The appearance of American gold and silver on the European markets, the gradual development ofindustry, the rapid expansion of trade and the consequent rise of the non-guild bourgeoisie and of money,gave these measures another significance. The State, which was daily less and less able to do without

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




money, now retained the ban on the export of gold and silver out of fiscal considerations; the bourgeois,for whom these masses of money which were hurled onto the market became the chief object ofspeculative buying, were thoroughly content with this; privileges established earlier became a source ofincome for the government and were sold for money; in the customs legislation there appeared the exportduty, which, since it only [placed] a hindrance in the way of industry, had a purely fiscal aim.The second period began in the middle of the seventeenth century and lasted almost to the end of theeighteenth. Commerce and navi-gation had expanded more rapidly than manufacture, which played asecondary role; the colonies were becoming considerable consumers; and after long struggles theseparate nations shared out the opening world market among themselves. This period begins with the

Navigation Laws [2] and colonial monopolies. The competition of the nations among themselves wasexcluded as far as possible by tariffs, prohibitions and treaties; and in the last resort the competitivestruggle was carried on and decided by wars (especially naval wars). The mightiest maritime nation, theEnglish, retained preponderance in trade and manufacture. Here, already, we find concentration in onecountry.Manufacture was all the time sheltered by protective duties in the home market, by monopolies in thecolonial market, and abroad as much as possible by differential duties. The working-up ofhome-produced material was encouraged (wool and linen in England, silk in France), the export ofhome-produced raw material forbidden (wool in England), and the [working-up] of imported materialneglected or suppressed (cotton in England). The nation dominant in sea trade and colonial powernaturally secured for itself also the greatest quantitative and qualitative expansion of manufacture.Manufacture could not be carried on without protection, since, if the slightest change takes place in othercountries, it can lose its market and be ruined; under reasonably favourable conditions it may easily beintroduced into a country, but for this very reason can easily be destroyed. At the same time through themode in which it is carried on, particularly in the eighteenth century, in the countryside, it is to such anextent interwoven with the vital relationships of a great mass of individuals, that no country darejeopardise its existence by permitting free competition. Insofar as it manages to export, it thereforedepends entirely on the extension or restriction of commerce, and exercises a relatively very smallreaction [on the latter]. Hence its secondary [importance] and the influence of [the merchants] in theeighteenth century. It was the merchants and especially the shippers who more than anybody else pressedfor State protection and monopolies; the manufacturers also demanded and indeed received protection,but all the time were inferior in political importance to the merchants. The commercial towns,particularly the maritime towns, became to some extent civilised and acquired the outlook of the big

bourgeoisie, but in the factory towns an extreme petty-bourgeois outlook persisted. Cf Aikin, [3] etc. Theeighteenth century was the century of trade. Pinto says this expressly: "Le commerce fait la marotte dusiècle" ; and: "Depuis quelque temps il n'est plus question que de commerce, de navgation et de marine."[ "Commerce is the rage of the century." "For some time now people have been talking only aboutcommerce, navigation and the navy." -Ed.]This period is also characterised by the cessation of the bans on the export of gold and silver and thebeginning of the trade in money; by banks, national debts, paper money; by speculation in stocks andshares and stockjobbing in all articles; by the development of finance in general. Again capital lost agreat part of the natural character which had still clung to it.The concentration of trade and manufacture in one country, England, developing irresistibly in theseventeenth century, gradually created for this country a relative world market, and thus a demand for the

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




manufactured products of this country, which could no longer be met by the industrial productive forceshitherto existing. This demand, outgrowing the productive forces, was the motive power which, byproducing big industry -- the application of elemental forces to industrial ends, machinery and the mostcomplex division of labour -- called into existence the third period of private ownership since the MiddleAges. There already existed in England the other pre-conditions of this new phase: freedom ofcompetition inside the nation, the development of theoretical mechanics, etc. (Indeed, the science ofmechanics perfected by Newton was altogether the most popular science in France and England in theeighteenth century.) (Free competition inside the nation itself had everywhere to be conquered by arevolution -- 1640 and 1688 in England, 1789 in France.) Competition soon compelled every country thatwished to retain its historical role to protect its manufactures by renewed customs regulations (the oldduties were no longer any good against big industry) and soon after to introduce big industry underprotective duties. Big industry universalised competition in spite of these protective measures (it ispractical free trade; the protective duty is only a palliative, a measure of defence within free trade),established means of communication and the modern world market, subordinated trade to itself,transformed all capital into industrial capital, and thus produced the rapid circulation (development of thefinancial system) and the centralisation of capital. By universal competition it forced all individuals tostrain their energy to the utmost. It destroyed as far as possible ideology, religion, morality, etc. andwhere it could not do this, made them into a palpable lie. It produced world history for the first time,insofar as it made all civilised nations and every individual member of them dependent for thesatisfaction of their wants on the whole world, thus destroying the former natural exclusiveness ofseparate nations. It made natural science subservient to capital and took from the division of labour thelast semblance of its natural character. It destroyed natural growth in general, as far as this is possiblewhile labour exists, and resolved all natural relationships into money relationships. In the place ofnaturally grown towns it created the modern, large industrial cities which have sprung up overnight.Wherever it penetrated, it destroyed the crafts and all earlier stages of industry. It completed the victoryof the commercial town over the countryside. [Its first premise] was the automatic system. [Itsdevelopment] produced a mass of productive forces, for which private [property] became just as much afetter as the guild had been for manufacture and the small, rural workshop for the developing craft. Theseproductive forces received under the system of private property a one-sided development only, andbecame for the majority destructive forces; moreover, a great multitude of such forces could find noapplication at all within this system. Generally speaking, big industry created everywhere the samerelations between the classes of society, and thus destroyed the peculiar individuality of the variousnationalities. And finally, while the bourgeoisie of each nation still retained separate national interests,big industry created a class, which in all nations has the same interest and with which nationality isalready dead; a class which is really rid of all the old world and at the same time stands pitted against it.Big industry makes for the worker not only the relation to the capitalist, but labour itself, unbearable.It is evident that big industry does not reach the same level of development in all districts of a country.This does not, however, retard the class movement of the proletariat, because the proletarians created bybig industry assume leadership of this movement and carry the whole mass along with them, and becausethe workers excluded from big industry are placed by it in a still worse situation than the workers in bigindustry itself. The countries in which big industry is developed act in a similar manner upon the more orless non-industrial countries, insofar as the latter are swept by universal commerce into the universal

competitive struggle. [4]These different forms are just so many forms of the organisation of labour, and hence of property. In

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




each period a unification of the existing productive forces takes place, insofar as this has been renderednecessary by needs.The Relation of State and Law to PropertyThe first form of property, in the ancient world as in the Middle Ages, is tribal property, determined withthe Romans chiefly by war, with the Germans by the rearing of cattle. In the case of the ancient peoples,since several tribes live together in one town, the tribal property appears as State property, and the rightof the individual to it as mere "possession which, however, like tribal property as a whole, is confined tolanded property only. Real private property began with the ancients, as with modern nations, with

movable property. -- (Slavery and community) (dominium ex jure Quiritum [5] ). In the case of thenations which grew out of the Middle Ages, tribal property evolved through various stages -- feudallanded property, corporative movable property, capital invested in manufacture -- to modern capital,determined by big industry and universal competition, i.e. pure private property, which has cast off allsemblance of a communal institution and has shut out the State from any influence on the developmentof property. To this modern private property corresponds the modern State, which, purchased graduallyby the owners of property by means of taxation, has fallen entirely into their hands through the nationaldebt, and its existence has become wholly dependent on the commercial credit which the owners ofproperty, the bourgeois, extend to it, as reflected in the rise and fall of State funds on the stock exchange.By the mere fact that it is a class and no longer an estate, the bourgeoisie is forced to organise itself nolonger locally, but nationally, and to give a general form to its mean average interest. Through theemancipation of private property from the community, the State has become a separate entity, beside andoutside civil society; but it is nothing more than the form of organisation which the bourgeois necessarilyadopt both for internal and external purposes, for the mutual guarantee of their property and interests.The independence of the State is only found nowadays in those countries where the estates have not yetcompletely developed into classes, where the estates, done away with in more advanced countries, stillhave a part to play, and where there exists a mixture; countries, that is to say, in which no one section ofthe population can achieve dominance over the others. This is the case particularly in Germany. The mostperfect example of the modern State is North America. The modern French, English and Americanwriters all express the opinion that the State exists only for the sake of private property, so that this facthas penetrated into the consciousness of the normal man.Since the State is the form in which the individuals of a ruling class assert their common interests, and inwhich the whole civil society of an epoch is epitomised, it follows that the State mediates in theformation of all common institutions and that the institutions receive a political form. Hence the illusionthat law is based on the will, and indeed on the will divorced from its real basis -- on free will. Similarly,justice is in its turn reduced to the actual laws.Civil law develops simultaneously with private property out of the disintegration of the naturalcommunity. With the Romans the development of private property and civil law had no further industrialand commercial consequences, because their whole mode of production did not alter. (Usury!)With modern peoples, where the feudal community was disintegrated by industry and trade, there beganwith the rise of private property and civil law a new phase, which was capable of further development.The very first town which carried on an extensive maritime trade in the Middle Ages, Amalfi, also

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




developed maritime law. As soon as industry and trade developed private property further, first in Italyand later in other countries, the highly developed Roman civil law was immediately adopted again andraised, to authority. When later the bourgeoisie had acquired so much power that the princes took up itsinterests in order to overthrow the feudal nobility by means of the bourgeoisie, there began in allcountries -- in France in the sixteenth century -- the real development of law, which in all countriesexcept England proceeded on the basis of the Roman Codex. In England, too, Roman legal principles hadto be introduced to further the development of civil law (especially in the case of movable property). (Itmust not be forgotten that law has just as little an independent history as religion.)In civil law the existing property relationships are declared to be the result of the general will. The jus

utendi et abutendi [6] itself asserts on the one hand the fact that private property has become entirelyindependent of the community, and on the other the illusion that private property itself is based solely onthe private will, the arbitrary disposal of the thing. In practice, the abuti 1 has very definite economiclimitations for the owner of private property, if he does not wish to see his property and hence his jusabutendi pass into other hands, since actually the thing, considered merely with reference to his will, isnot a thing at all, but only becomes a thing, true property in intercourse, and independently of the law (arelationship, which the philosophers call an idea). This juridical illusion, which reduces law to the merewill, necessarily leads, in the further development of property relationships, to the position that a manmay have a legal title to a thing without really having the thing. If, for instance, the income from a pieceof land is lost owing to competition, then the proprietor has certainly his legal title to it along with the jusutendi et abutendi. But he can do nothing with it: he owns nothing as a landed proprietor if in addition hehas not enough capital to cultivate his ground. This illusion of the jurists also explains the fact that forthem, as for every code, it is altogether fortuitous that individuals enter into relationships amongthemselves (e.g. contracts); it explains why they consider that these relationships [can] be entered into ornot at will, and that their content rests purely on the individual [free] will of the contracting parties.Whenever, through the development of industry and commerce, new forms of intercourse have beenevolved (e.g. assurance companies, etc.), the law has always been compelled to admit them among themodes of acquiring property.

FOOTNOTES

[1] Four pages of the manuscript are missing here.-Ed.

[2] Navigation Laws -- a series of Acts passed in England from 1381 onwards to protect English shippingagainst foreign companies. The Navigation Laws were modified in the early nineteenth century andrepealed in 1849 except for a reservation regarding coasting trade, which was revoked in 1854.

[3] The movement of capital, although considerably accelerated, still remained, however, relatively slow.The splitting-up of the world market into separate parts, each of which was exploited by a particularnation, the exclusion of competition among themselves on the part of the nations, the clumsiness ofproduction itself and the fact that finance was only evolving from its early stages, greatly impededcirculation. The consequence of this was a haggling, mean and niggardly spirit which still clung to allmerchants and to the whole mode of carrying on trade. Compared with the manufacturers, and above allwith the craftsmen, they were certainly big bourgeois; compared with the merchants and industrialists ofthe next period they remain petty bourgeois. Cf. Adam Smith.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




[4] Competition separates individuals from one another, not only the bourgeois but still more theworkers, in spite of the fact that it brings them together. Hence it is a long time before these individualscan unite, apart from the fact that for the purposes of this union -- if it is not to be merely local -- thenecessary means, the great industrial cities and cheap and quick communications, have first to beproduced by big industry. Hence every organised power standing over against these isolated individuals,who live in relationships, daily reproducing this isolation, can only be overcome after long struggles. Todemand the opposite would be tantamount to demanding that competition should not exist in this definiteepoch of history, or that the individuals should banish from their minds relationships over which in theirisolation they have no control.

[5] Ownership in accordance with the law applying to full Roman citizens.-Ed.

[6] The right of using and consuming (also: abusing), i.e. of disposing of a thing at will.-Ed.

Next Section

Table of Contents for The German Ideology

Marxist Writers Archive

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_c.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:04]




Karl MarxTHE GERMAN IDEOLOGY

Part IFEUERBACH.OPPOSTION OF THE MATERIALISTAND IDEALIST OUTLOOK

D. PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISM

 Individuals, Class, and CommunityIn the Middle Ages the citizens in each town were compelled to unite against the landed nobility to savetheir skins. The extension of trade, the establishment of communications, led the separate towns to get toknow other towns, which had asserted the same interests in the struggle with the same antagonist. Out ofthe many local corporations of burghers there arose only gradually the burgher class. The conditions oflife of the individual burghers became, on account of their contradiction to the existing relationships andof the mode of labour determined by these, conditions which were common to them all and independentof each individual. The burghers had created the conditions insofar as they had torn themselves free fromfeudal ties, and were created by them insofar as they were determined by their antagonism to the feudalsystem which they found in existence. When the individual towns began to enter into associations, thesecommon conditions developed into class conditions. The same conditions, the same contradiction, thesame interests necessarily called forth on the whole similar customs everywhere. The bourgeoisie itselfwith its conditions, develops only gradually, splits according to the division of labour into various

fractions and finally absorbs all propertied classes it finds in existence [1] (while it develops the majorityof the earlier propertyless and a part of the hitherto propertied classes into a new class, the proletariat) inthe measure to which all property found in existence is transformed into industrial or commercial capital.The separate individuals form a class only insofar as they have to carry on a common battle againstanother class; otherwise they are on hostile terms with each other as competitors. On the other hand, theclass in its turn achieves an independent existence over against the individuals, so that the latter find theirconditions of existence predestined, and hence have their position in life and their personal developmentassigned to them by their class, become subsumed under it. This is the same phenomenon as thesubjection of the separate individuals to the division of labour and can only be removed by the abolitionof private property and of labour itself We have already indicated several times how this subsuming ofindividuals under the class brings with it their subjection to all kinds of ideas, etc.If from a philosophical point of view one considers this evolution of individuals in the commonconditions of existence of estates and classes, which followed on one another, and in the accompanyinggeneral conceptions forced upon them, it is certainly very easy to imagine that in these individuals thespecies, or "Man", has evolved, or that they evolved "Man" -- and in this way one can give history some

hard clouts on the ear. [2] One can conceive these various estates and classes to be specific terms of the

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (1 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




general expression, subordinate varieties of the species, or evolutionary phases of "Man".This subsuming of individuals under definite classes cannot be abolished until a class has taken shape,which has no longer any particular class interest to assert against the ruling class.The transformation, through the division of labour, of personal powers (relationships) into materialpowers, cannot be dispelled by dismissing the general idea of it from one's mind, but can only beabolished by the individuals again subjecting these material powers to themselves and abolishing thedivision of labour. This is not possible without the community. Only in community [with others haseach] individual the means of cultivating his gifts in all directions; only in the community, therefore, ispersonal freedom possible. In the previous substitutes for the community, in the State, etc. personalfreedom has existed only for the individuals who developed within the relationships of the ruling class,and only insofar as they were individuals of this class. The illusory community, in which individualshave up till now combined, always took on an independent existence in relation to them, and was at thesame time, since it was the combination of one class over against another, not only a completely illusorycommunity, but a new fetter as well. In a real community the individuals obtain their freedom in andthrough their association.Individuals have always built on themselves, but naturally on themselves within their given historicalconditions and relationships, not on the "pure" individual in the sense of the ideologists. But in the courseof historical evolution, and precisely through the inevitable fact that within the division of labour socialrelationships take on an independent existence, there appears a division within the life of each individual,insofar as it is personal and insofar as it is determined by some branch of labour and the conditionspertaining to it. (We do not mean it to be understood from this that, for example, the rentier, thecapitalist, etc. cease to be persons; but their personality is conditioned and determined by quite definiteclass relationships, and the division appears only in their opposition to another class and, for themselves,only when they go bankrupt.) In the estate (and even more in the tribe) this is as yet concealed: forinstance, a nobleman always remains a nobleman, a commoner always a commoner, apart from his otherrelationships, a quality inseparable from his individuality. The division between the personal and theclass individual, the accidental nature of the conditions of life for the individual, appears only with theemergence of the class, which is itself a product of the bourgeoisie. This accidental character is onlyengendered and developed by competition and the struggle of individuals among themselves. Thus, inimagination, individuals seem freer under the dominance of the bourgeoisie than before, because theirconditions of life seem accidental; in reality, of course, they are less free, because they are moresubjected to the violence of things. The difference from the estate comes out particularly in theantagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. When the estate of the urban burghers, thecorporations, etc. emerged in opposition to the landed nobility, their condition of existence -- movableproperty and craft labour, which had already existed latently before their separation from the feudal ties-- appeared as something positive, which was asserted against feudal landed property, and, therefore, inits own way at first took on a feudal form. Certainly the refugee serfs treated their previous servitude assomething accidental to their personality. But here they only were doing what every class that is freeingitself from a fetter does; and they did not free themselves as a class but separately. Moreover, they didnot rise above the system of estates, but only formed a new estate, retaining their previous mode oflabour even in their new situation, and developing it further by freeing it from its earlier fetters, which no

longer corresponded to the development already attained. [3]For the proletarians, on the other hand, the condition of their existence, labour, and with it all the

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (2 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




conditions of existence governing modern society, have become something accidental, something overwhich they, as separate individuals, have no control, and over which no social organisation can give themcontrol. The contradiction between the individuality of each separate proletarian and labour, thecondition of life forced upon him, becomes evident to him himself, for he is sacrificed from youthupwards and, within his own class, has no chance of arriving at the conditions which would place him inthe other class.Thus, while the refugee serfs only wished to be free to develop and assert those conditions of existencewhich were already there, and hence, in the end, only arrived at free labour, the proletarians, if they are toassert themselves as individuals, will have to abolish the very condition of their existence hitherto (whichhas, moreover, been that of all society up to the present), namely, labour. Thus they find themselvesdirectly opposed to the form in which, hitherto, the individuals, of which society consists, have giventhemselves collective expression, that is, the State. In order, therefore, to assert themselves asindividuals, they must overthrow the State.It follows from all we have been saying up till now that the communal relationship into which theindividuals of a class entered, and which was determined by their common interests over against a thirdparty, was always a community to which these individuals belonged only as average individuals, onlyinsofar as they lived within the conditions of existence of their class -- a relationship in which theyparticipated not as individuals but as members of a class. With the community of revolutionaryproletarians, on the other hand, who take their conditions of existence and those of all members ofsociety under their control, it is just the reverse; it is as individuals that the individuals participate in it. Itis just this combination of individuals (assuming the advanced stage of modern productive forces, ofcourse) which puts the conditions of the free development and movement of individuals under theircontrol -- conditions which were previously abandoned to chance and had won an independent existenceover against the separate individuals just because of their separation as individuals, and because of thenecessity of their combination which had been determined by the division of labour, and through theirseparation had become a bond alien to them. Combination up till now (by no means an arbitrary one,such as is expounded for example in the Contrat social, but a necessary one) was an agreement uponthese conditions, within which the individuals were free to enjoy the freaks of fortune (compare, e.g., theformation of the North American State and the South American republics). This right to the undisturbedenjoyment, within certain conditions, of fortuity and chance has up till now been called personalfreedom. These conditions of existence are, of course, only the productive forces and forms ofintercourse at any particular time.Forms of IntercourseCommunism differs from all previous movements in that it overturns the basis of all earlier relations ofproduction and intercourse, and for the first time consciously treats all natural premises as the creaturesof hitherto existing men, strips them of their natural character and subjugates them to the power of theunited individuals. Its organisation is, therefore, essentially economic, the material production of theconditions of this unity; it turns existing conditions into conditions of unity. The reality, whichcommunism is creating, is precisely the true basis for rendering it impossible that anything should existindependently of individuals, insofar as reality is only a product of the preceding intercourse of

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (3 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




individuals themselves. Thus the communists in practice treat the conditions created up to now byproduction and intercourse as inorganic conditions, without, however, imagining that it was the plan orthe destiny of previous generations to give them material, and without believing that these conditionswere inorganic for the individuals creating them. The difference between the individual as a person andwhat is accidental to him, is not a conceptual difference but an historical fact. This distinction has adifferent significance at different times -- e.g. the estate as something accidental to the individual in theeighteenth century, the family more or less too. It is not a distinction that we have to make for each age,but one which each age makes itself from among the different elements which it finds in existence, andindeed not according to any theory, but compelled by material collisions in life. What appears accidentalto the later age as opposed to the earlier -- and this applies also to the elements handed down by anearlier age -- is a form of intercourse which corresponded to a definite stage of development of theproductive forces. The relation of the productive forces to the form of intercourse is the relation of theform of intercourse to the occupation or activity of the individuals. (The fundamental form of thisactivity is, of course, material, on which depend all other forms-mental, political, religious, etc. Thevarious shaping of material life is, of course, in every case dependent on the needs which are alreadydeveloped, and the production, as well as the satisfaction, of these needs is an historical process, which isnot found in the case of a sheep or a dog (Stirner's refractory principal argument adversus hominem),although sheep and dogs in their present form certainly, but malgré eux, are products of an historicalprocess.) The conditions under which individuals have intercourse with each other, so long as theabove-mentioned contradiction is absent, are conditions appertaining to their individuality, in no wayexternal to them; conditions under which these definite individuals, living under definite relationships,can alone produce their material life and what is connected with it, are thus the conditions of theirself-activity and are produced by this self-activity. The definite condition under which they produce, thuscorresponds, as long as the contradiction has not yet appeared, to the reality of their conditioned nature,their one-sided existence, the one-sidedness of which only becomes evident when the contradictionenters on the scene and thus exists for the later individuals. Then this condition appears as an accidentalfetter, and the consciousness that it is a fetter is imputed to the earlier age as well.These various conditions, which appear first as conditions of self-activity, later as fetters upon it, form inthe whole evolution of history a coherent series of forms of intercourse, the coherence of which consistsin this: in the place of an earlier form of intercourse, which has become a fetter, a new one is put,corresponding to the more developed productive forces and, hence, to the advanced mode of theself-activity of individuals-a form which in its turn becomes a fetter and is then replaced by another.Since these conditions correspond at every stage to the simultaneous development of the productiveforces, their history is at the same time the history of the evolving productive forces taken over by eachnew generation, and is, therefore, the history of the development of the forces of the individualsthemselves.Since this evolution takes place naturally, i.e. is not subordinated to a general plan of freely combinedindividuals, it proceeds from various localities, tribes, nations, branches of labour, etc. each of which tostart with develops independently of the others and only gradually enters into relation with the others.Furthermore, it takes place only very slowly; the various stages and interests are never completelyovercome, but only subordinated to the prevailing interest and trail along beside the latter for centuriesafterwards. It follows from this that within a nation itself the individuals, even apart from their pecuniarycircumstances, have quite different developments, and that an earlier interest, the peculiar form ofintercourse of which has already been ousted by that belonging to a later interest, remains for a long time

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (4 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




afterwards in possession of a traditional power in the illusory community (State, law), which has won anexistence independent of the individuals; a power which in the last resort can only be broken by arevolution. This explains why, with reference to individual points which allow of a more generalsumming-up, consciousness can sometimes appear further advanced than the contemporary empiricalrelationships, so that in the struggles of a later epoch one can refer to earlier theoreticians as authorities.On the other hand, in countries which, like North America, begin in an already advanced historicalepoch, the development proceeds very rapidly. Such countries have no other natural premises than theindividuals, who settled there and were led to do so because the forms of intercourse of the old countriesdid not correspond to their wants. Thus they begin with the most advanced individuals of the oldcountries, and, therefore, with the correspondingly most advanced form of intercourse, before this formof intercourse has been able to establish itself in the old countries. This is the case with all colonies,insofar as they are not mere military or trading stations. Carthage, the Greek colonies, and Iceland in theeleventh and twelfth centuries, provide examples of this. A similar relationship issues from conquest,when a form of intercourse which has evolved on another soil is brought over complete to the conqueredcountry: whereas in its home it was still encumbered with interests and relationships left over fromearlier periods, here it can and must be established completely and without hindrance, if only to assurethe conquerors' lasting power. (England and Naples after the Norman conquest. when they received themost perfect form of feudal organisation.)This contradiction between the productive forces and the form of intercourse, which, as we saw, hasoccurred several times in past history, without, however, endangering the basis, necessarily on eachoccasion burst out in a revolution, taking on at the same time various subsidiary forms, such asall-embracing collisions, collisions of various classes, contradiction of consciousness, battle of ideas,etc., political conflict, etc. From a narrow point of view one may isolate one of these subsidiary formsand consider it as the basis of these revolutions; and this is all the more easy as the individuals whostarted the revolutions had illusions about their own activity according to their degree of culture and thestage of historical development.Thus all collisions in history have their origin, according to our view, in the contradiction between theproductive forces and the form of intercourse. Incidentally, to lead to collisions in a country, thiscontradiction need not necessarily have reached its extreme limit in this particular country. Thecompetition with industrially more advanced countries, brought about by the expansion of internationalintercourse, is sufficient to produce a similar contradiction in countries with a backward industry (e.g. thelatent proletariat in Germany brought into view by view by the competition of English industry).ConquestThis whole interpretation of history appears to be contradicted by the fact of conquest. Up till nowviolence, war, pillage, murder and robbery, etc. have been accepted as the driving force of history. Herewe must limit ourselves to the chief points and take, therefore, only the most striking example -- thedestruction of an old civilisation by a barbarous people and the resulting formation of an entirely neworganisation of society. (Rome and the barbarians; feudalism and Gaul; the Byzantine Empire and theTurks.)

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (5 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




With the conquering barbarian people war itself is still, as indicated above, a regular form of intercourse,which is the more eagerly exploited as the increase in population together with the traditional and, for it,the only possible, crude mode of production gives rise to the need for new means of production. In Italy,on the other hand, the concentration of landed property (caused not only by buying-up and indebtednessbut also by inheritance, since loose living being rife and marriage rare, the old families gradually died outand their possessions fell into the hands of a few) and its conversion into grazing land (caused not onlyby the usual economic forces still operative today but by the importation of plundered and tribute-cornand the resultant lack of demand for Italian corn) brought about the almost total disappearance of the freepopulation. The very slaves died out again and again, and had constantly to be replaced by new ones.Slavery remained the basis of the whole productive system. The plebeians, midway between freemen andslaves, never succeeded in becoming more than a proletarian rabble. Rome indeed never became morethan a city; its connection with the provinces was almost exclusively political and could, therefore, easilybe broken again by political events.Nothing is more common than the notion that in history up till now it has only been a question of taking.The barbarians take the Roman Empire, and this fact of taking is made to explain the transition from theold world to the feudal system. In this taking by barbarians, however, the question is, whether the nationwhich is conquered has evolved industrial productive forces, as is the case with modern peoples, orwhether their productive forces are based for the most part merely on their association and on thecommunity. Taking is further determined by the object taken. A banker's fortune, consisting of paper,cannot be taken at all, without the taker's submitting to the conditions of production and intercourse ofthe country taken. Similarly the total industrial capital of a modern industrial country. And finally,everywhere there is very soon an end to taking, and when there is nothing more to take, you have to setabout producing. From this necessity of producing, which very soon asserts itself, it follows that the formof community adopted by the settling conquerors must correspond to the stage of development of theproductive forces they find in existence; or, if this is not the case from the start, it must change accordingto the productive forces. By this, too, is explained the fact, which people profess to have noticedeverywhere in the period following the migration of the peoples, namely, that the servant was master,and that the conquerors very soon took over language, culture and manners from the conquered. Thefeudal system was by no means brought complete from Germany, but had its origin, as far as theconquerors were concerned, in the martial organisation of the army during the actual conquest, and thisonly evolved after the conquest into the feudal system proper through the action of the productive forcesfound in the conquered countries. To what an extent this form was determined by the productive forces isshown by the abortive attempts to realise other forms derived from reminiscences of ancient Rome(Charlemagne, etc.).Contradictions of Big Industry: RevolutionOur investigation hitherto started from the instruments of production, and it has already shown thatprivate property was a necessity for certain industrial stages. In industrie extractive private property stillcoincides with labour; in small industry and all agriculture up till now property is the necessaryconsequence of the existing instruments of production; in big industry the contradiction between theinstrument of production and private property appears from the first time and is the product of bigindustry; moreover, big industry must be highly developed to produce this contradiction. And thus only

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (6 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




with big industry does the abolition of private property become possible.In big industry and competition the whole mass of conditions of existence, limitations, biases ofindividuals, are fused together into the two simplest forms: private property and labour. With moneyevery form of intercourse, and intercourse itself, is considered fortuitous for the individuals. Thus moneyimplies that all previous intercourse was only intercourse of individuals under particular conditions, notof individuals as individuals. These conditions are reduced to two: accumulated labour or privateproperty, and actual labour. If both or one of these ceases, then intercourse comes to a standstill. Themodern economists themselves, e.g. Sismondi, Cherbuliez, etc., oppose "association of individuals" to"association of capital". On the other hand, the individuals themselves are entirely subordinated to thedivision of labour and hence are brought into the most complete dependence on one another. Privateproperty, insofar as within labour itself it is opposed to labour, evolves out of the necessity ofaccumulation, and has still, to begin with, rather the form of the communality; but in its furtherdevelopment it approaches more and more the modern form of private property. The division of labourimplies from the outset the division of the conditions of labour, of tools and materials, and thus thesplitting-up of accumulated capital among different owners, and thus, also, the division between capitaland labour, and the different forms of property itself. The more the division of labour develops andaccumulation grows, the sharper are the forms that this process of differentiation assumes. Labour itselfcan only exist on the premise of this fragmentation.Thus two facts are here revealed. First the productive forces appear as a world for themselves, quiteindependent of and divorced from the individuals, alongside the individuals: the reason for this is that theindividuals, whose forces they are, exist split up and in opposition to one another, whilst, on the otherhand, these forces are only real forces in the intercourse and association of these individuals. Thus, on theone hand, we have a totality of productive forces, which have, as it were, taken on a material form andare for the individuals no longer the forces of the individuals but of private property, and hence of theindividuals only insofar as they are owners of private property themselves. Never, in any earlier period,have the productive forces taken on a form so indifferent to the intercourse of individuals as individuals,because their intercourse itself was formerly a restricted one. On the other hand, standing over againstthese productive forces, we have the majority of the individuals from whom these forces have beenwrested away, and who, robbed thus of all real life-content, have become abstract individuals, but whoare, however, only by this fact put into a position to enter into relation with one another as individuals.The only connection which still links them with the productive forces and with their own existence --labour -- has lost all semblance of self-activity and only sustains their life by stunting it. While in theearlier periods self-activity and the production of material life were separated, in that they devolved ondifferent persons, and while, on account of the narrowness of the individuals themselves, the productionof material life was considered as a subordinate mode of self-activity, they now diverge to such an extentthat altogether material life appears as the end, and what produces this material life, labour (which is nowthe only possible but, as we see, negative form of self-activity), as the means.Thus things have now come to such a pass that the individuals must appropriate the existing totality ofproductive forces, not only to achieve self-activity, but, also, merely to safeguard their very existence.This appropriation is first determined by the object to be appropriated, the productive forces, which havebeen developed to a totality and which only exist within a universal intercourse. From this aspect alone,therefore, this appropriation must have a universal character corresponding to the productive forces andthe intercourse.

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (7 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




The appropriation of these forces is itself nothing more than the development of the individual capacitiescorresponding to the material instruments of production. The appropriation of a totality of instruments ofproduction is, for this very reason, the development of a totality of capacities in the individualsthemselves.This appropriation is further determined by the persons appropriating. Only the proletarians of thepresent day, who are completely shut off from all self-activity, are in a position to achieve a completeand no longer restricted self-activity, which consists in the appropriation of a totality of productive forcesand in the thus postulated development of a totality of capacities. All earlier revolutionary appropriationswere restricted; individuals, whose self-activity was restricted by a crude instrument of production and alimited intercourse, appropriated this crude instrument of production, and hence merely achieved a newstate of limitation. Their instrument of production became their property, but they themselves remainedsubordinate to the division of labour and their own instrument of production. In all expropriations up tonow, a mass of individuals remained subservient to a single instrument of production; in theappropriation by the proletarians, a mass of instruments of production must be made subject to eachindividual, and property to all. Modern universal intercourse can be controlled by individuals, therefore,only when controlled by all.This appropriation is further determined by the manner in which it must be effected. It can only beeffected through a union, which by the character of the proletariat itself can again only be a universalone, and through a revolution, in which, on the one hand, the power of the earlier mode of productionand intercourse and social organisation is overthrown, and, on the other hand, there develops theuniversal character and the energy of the proletariat, without which the revolution cannot beaccomplished; and in which, further, the proletariat rids itself of everything that still clings to it from itsprevious position in society.Only at this stage does self-activity coincide with material life, which corresponds to the development ofindividuals into complete individuals and the casting-off of all natural limitations. The transformation oflabour into self-activity corresponds to the transformation of the earlier limited intercourse into theintercourse of individuals as such. With the appropriation of the total productive forces through unitedindividuals, private property comes to an end. Whilst previously in history a particular condition alwaysappeared as accidental, now the isolation of individuals and the particular private gain of each man havethemselves become accidental.The individuals, who are no longer subject to the division of labour, have been conceived by thephilosophers as an ideal, under the name "Man". They have conceived the whole process which we haveoutlined as the evolutionary process of "Man", so that at every historical stage "Man" was substituted forthe individuals and shown as the motive force of history. The whole process was thus conceived as aprocess of the self-estrangement of "Man", and this was essentially due to the fact that the averageindividual of the later stage was always foisted on to the earlier stage, and the consciousness of a laterage on to the individuals of an earlier. Through this inversion, which from the first is an abstract image ofthe actual conditions, it was possible to transform the whole of history into an evolutionary process ofconsciousness.Finally, from the conception of history we have sketched we obtain these further conclusions: (1) In thedevelopment of productive forces there comes a stage when productive forces and means of intercourseare brought into being, which, under the existing relationships, only cause mischief, and are no longer

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (8 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




productive but destructive forces (machinery and money); and connected with this a class is called forth,which has to bear all the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages, which, ousted from society,is forced into the most decided antagonism to all other classes; a class which forms the majority of allmembers of society, and from which emanates the consciousness of the necessity of a fundamentalrevolution, the communist consciousness, which may, of course, arise among the other classes toothrough the contemplation of the situation of this class. (2) The conditions under which definiteproductive forces can be applied are the conditions of the rule of a definite class of society, whose socialpower, deriving from its property, has its practical-idealistic expression in each case in the form of theState; and, therefore, every revolutionary struggle is directed against a class, which till then has been in

power.[4] (3) In all revolutions up till now the mode of activity always remained unscathed and it wasonly a question of a different distribution of this activity, a new distribution of labour to other persons,whilst the communist revolution is directed against the preceding mode of activity, does away withlabour, and abolishes the rule of all classes with the classes themselves, because it is carried through bythe class which no longer counts as a class in society, is not recognised as a class, and is in itself theexpression of the dissolution of all classes, nationalities, etc. within present society; and (4) Both for theproduction on a mass scale of this communist consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, thealteration of men on a mass scale is, necessary, an alteration which can only take place in a practicalmovement, a revolution; this revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannotbe overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolutionsucceed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.

FOOTNOTES

[1] [Marginal note by Marx:] To begin with it absorbs the branches of labour directly belonging to theState and then all ±[more or less] ideological estates.

[2] The Statement which frequently occurs with Saint Max that each is all that he is through the State isfundamentally the same as the statement that bourgeois is only a specimen of the bourgeois species; astatement which presupposes that the class of bourgeois existed before the individuals constituting it.[Marginal note by Marx to this sentence:] With the philosophers pre-existence of the class.

[3] N.B. -- It must not he forgotten that the serf's very need of existing and the im-possibility of alarge-scale economy, which involved the distribution of the allotments among the serfs, very soonreduced the services of the serfs to their lord to an average of payments in kind and statute-labour. Thismade it possible for the serf to accumulate movable property and hence facilitated his escape out of thepossession of his lord and gave him the prospect of making his way as an urban citizen; it also createdgradations among the serfs, so that the runaway serfs were already half burghers. It is likewise obviousthat the serfs who were masters of a craft had the best chance of acquiring movable property.

[4] [Marginal note by Marx:] The people are interested in maintaining the present state of production.

Table of Contents for The German Ideology

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (9 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




Marxist Writers Archive

The German Ideology http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/part_d.htm (10 of 10) [23/08/2000 16:34:09]




Karl Marx and Fredrick EngelsA Critique of the German Ideology

Abstract of Chapter 3[Idealist mistakes & Materialist corrections]

Idealist misconceptions

On Hierachy

On Religion

Consciousness throughout history

An idealist conception of Humans

On Language & Idealism

Individuality according to Materialism

Individualism created

Individualism in a class perspective

The relation of individual interests to class interests

The role of will in the desires of an individual

Individuality in thought and desire

Needs being the vocation of all human beings

The role of individual will in the foundation of the

state

Individuals and their relationships

Miscellaneous

The Family

Consciousness changing with the development of

society

Freeing labor

Communists on Selfishness and Selflessnes

Alienation due to private property

The relation of the bourgeois to the capitalist state

On Competition

Personal Competition

The monetary crisisThe German ideology was never published inMarx or Engels lifetime. When the manuscriptwas discovered, tattered and worn down, the fullbook was published by the Institute of Marxism inthe USSR. Since its publication, the first chapter,as printed in this publication in whole, receivedenormous popularity as an excellent overview ofthe materialist conception of history. At the sametime however, the second and third chapterreceived unanimous notoriety for being withoutvalue, critiquing ideas long since forgotten,neglected even by Marx and Engels who nevereven finished this, their first joint book.While the main body of the book is not valuable,there are portions of material, where Marx andEngels were explaining their theory instead ofcritiquing those long forgotten, that contain clearand valuable information. The only criteria usedfor selecting material for this collection wassimply that information where Marx and Engelsexplained their own theories.If you would like to read their critique of SaintMax and Saint Bruno then read the book; about aquarter of Chapters 2 & 3 are dedicated solely to acritique. Nearly the entire remainder of the book isa repetition of Saint Max and Saint Bruno'swriters, very meticulously and thoroughlyreproduced in this text. While a critique of SaintMax and Saint Bruno would be useful to read ifthe ideas they expressed were of any relevance orimportance, this is not the case. The ideas theysupported are long since forgotten.Paragraphs have been introduced to the selectedpassages for easier reading, and section headers

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (1 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




have been inserted. 

Idealism

 " Hierarchy is the domination of thought , the domination of the spirit.... Hierarchy is the supremedomination of spirit ."In the foregoing presentation Jacques le bonhomme conceives history merely as the product of abstractthoughts — or, rather, of his notions of abstract thoughts — as governed by these notions, which, in thefinal analysis, are all resolved into the "holy". This domination of the "holy", of thought, of the Hegelian

absolute idea over the incurable world he further betrays as a historical relation existing at the presenttime, as the domination of the holy ones, the ideologies, over the vulgar world — as a hierarchy. In thishierarchy, what previously appeared consecutively exists side-by-side, so that one of the two co-existingforms of development rules over the other...The outcome, of course, is bound to be that the domination which the "world of thoughts" exercises fromthe outset in history is at the end of the latter also presented as the real, actually existing domination ofthe thinkers — and, as we shall see, in the final analysis, as the domination of the speculativephilosophers — over the world of things, so that Saint Max has only to fight against thoughts and ideasof the ideologies and to overcome them, in order to make himself "possessor of the world of things in theworld of thoughts".p. 186As for the actual hierarchy of the Middle Ages, we shall merely note here that it did not exist for thepeople, for the great mass of human beings. For the great mass only feudalism existed, and hierarchyonly existed insofar as it was itself either feudal or anti-feudal (within the framework of feudalism).Feudalism itself had entirely empirical relations as its basis. Hierarchy and struggle against feudalism(the struggle of the ideologies of a class against the class itself) are only the ideological expression offeudalism and of the struggles developing within feudalism itself — which include also the struggles ofthe feudally organized nations among themselves. Hierarchy is the ideal form of feudalism; feudalism isa political form of the medieval relations of production and intercourse. Consequently, the struggle offeudalism against hierarchy can only be explained by elucidating these practical material relations. Thiselucidation of itself puts an end to the previous conception of history which took the illusions of theMiddle Ages on trust, in particular those illusions which the Emperor and the Pope brought to bear intheir struggle against each other.p. 190We now come to present-day hierarchy, to the domination of the idea in ordinary life.... Since the middleclass demand love for their kingdom, their regime, they want, according to Jacques le bonhomme, to"establish the kingdom of love on earth". (p. 98) Since they demand respect for their domination and forthe conditions in which it is exercised, and therefore want to usurp domination over respect, they

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (2 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




demand, according to this worthy man [Jacques le bonhomme], the domination of respect as such, theirattitude towards respect is the same as towards the holy spirit dwelling within them. (p. 95) Jacques lebonhomme, with his faith that can move mountains, takes as the actual, earthly basis of the bourgeoisworld the distorted form in which the sanctimonious and hypocritical ideology of the bourgeoisie voicestheir particular interests as universal interests. Why this ideological delusion assumes precisely this formfor our Saint, we shall see in connection with "political liberalism".p. 193-4

On ReligionIn religion people make their empirical world into an entity that is only conceived, imagined, thatconfronts them as something foreign. This again is by no means to be explained from other concepts,from "self-consciousness" and similar nonsense, but from the entire hitherto existing mode of productionand intercourse, which is just as independent of the pure concept as the invention of the self-acting muleand the use of railways are independent of Hegelian philosophy. If he wants to speak of an "essence" ofreligion, i.e., of a material basis of this inessentiality, then he should look for it neither in the "essence ofman", nor in the predicate of God, but in the material world which each stage of religious developmentfinds in existence.p. 172The only reason why Christianity wanted to free us from the domination of the flesh and "desires as adriving force" was because it regarded our flesh, our desires as something foreign to us; it wanted to freeus from determination by nature only because it regarded our own nature as not belonging to us.For if I myself am not nature, if my natural desires, my whole natural character, do not belong to myself— and this is the doctrine of Christianity — then all determination by nature — whether due to my ownnatural character or to what is known as external nature — seems to me a determination by somethingforeign, a fetter, compulsion used against me, heteronomy as opposed to autonomy of the spirit .Incidentally, Christianity has indeed never succeeded in freeing us from the domination of desires.p. 272

Consciousness throughout history[In ancient times] the ideas and thoughts of people were, of course, ideas and thoughts about themselvesand their relationships, their consciousness of themselves and of people in general — for it was theconsciousness not merely of a single individual but of the individual in his interconnection with thewhole of society and about the whole of the society in which they live.The conditions, independent of them, in which they produce their life, the necessary forms of intercourseconnected herewith, and the personal and social relations thereby given, had to take the form — insofaras they were expressed in thoughts — of ideal conditions and necessary relations, i.e., they had to beexpressed in consciousness as determinations arising from the concept of man as such , from humanessence, from the nature of man, from man as such . What people were, what their relations were,

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (3 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




appeared in consciousness as ideas of man as such , of his modes of existence or of his immediateconceptual determinations.So, after the ideologists had assumed that ideas and thoughts had dominated history up to now, that thehistory of these ideas and thoughts constitutes all history up to now, after they had imagined that realconditions had conformed to man as such and his ideal conditions, i.e., to conceptual determinations,after they had made the history of people's consciousness of themselves the basis of their actual history,after all this, nothing was easier than to call the history of consciousness, of ideas, of the holy, ofestablished concepts — the history of "man" and to put it in the place of real history.p. 198

An idealist conception of HumansSancho raises the important question:"But how to curb the inhuman being who dwells in each individual? How can one manage not to set freethe inhuman being along with the human being?.... At the side of the human being there's always theinhuman being, that egoist, the individual. State, society, mankind cannot master this devil."In the form in which Sancho understands it, the question again becomes sheer nonsense. He imaginesthat people up to now have always formed a concept of man, and then won freedom for themselves to theextent that was necessary to realize this concept; that the measure of freedom that they achieved wasdetermined each time by their idea of the ideal of man at the time; it was thus unavoidable that in eachindividual there remained a residue which did not correspond to this ideal and, hence, since it was"inhuman", was either not set free or only freed malgre eux .In reality, of course, what happened was that people won freedom for themselves each time to the extentthat was dictated and permitted not by their ideal of man, but by the existing productive forces. Allemancipation carried through hitherto has been based, however, on unrestricted productive forces. Theproduction which these productive forces could provide was insufficient for the whole of society andmade development possible only if some persons satisfied their needs at the expense of others, andtherefore some — the minority — obtained the monopoly of development, while others — the majority— owing to the constant struggle to satisfy their most essential needs, were for the time being (i.e., untilthe creation of new revolutionary productive forces) excluded from any development.Thus, society has hitherto always developed within the framework of a contradiction — in antiquity thecontradiction between freemen and slaves, in the Middle Ages that between nobility and serfs, in moderntimes that between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. This explains, on the one hand, the abnormal,"inhuman" way in which the oppressed class satisfies its needs, and, on the other hand, the narrow limitswithin which intercourse, and with it the whole ruling class, develops. And this restricted character ofdevelopment consists not only in the exclusion of one class from development, but also in thenarrowmindedness of the excluding class, and the "inhuman" is to be found also within the ruling class.This so-called "inhuman" is just as much a product of present-day relations as the "human" is; it is theirnative aspect, the rebellion — which is not based on any new revolutionary productive force — againstthe prevailing relations brought about by the existing productive forces, and against the way of satisfyingneeds that correspond to these relations. The positive expression "human" corresponds to the definite

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (4 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




relations predominate at a certain stage of production in the way of satisfying needs determined by them,just as the negative expression "inhuman" corresponds to the attempt to negate these predominaterelations in the way of satisfying needs prevailing under them without changing the existing mode ofproduction, an attempt that this stage of production daily engenders afresh.p. 457

On Language & IdealismOne of the most difficult tasks confronting philosophers is to descend from the world of thought to theactual world. Language is the immediate actuality of thought. Just as philosophers have given thought anindependent existence, so they were bound to make language into an independent realm. This is a secretof philosophical language, in which thoughts in the form of words have their own content. The problemof descending from the world of thoughts to the actual world is turned into the problem of descendingfrom language to life.We have shown [in Chapter 1] that thoughts and ideas acquire an independent existence in consequenceof the personal circumstances and relations of individuals acquiring independent existence. We haveshown that exclusive, systematic occupation with these thoughts on the part of ideologists andphilosophers, and hence the systemization of these thoughts, is a consequence of division of labour, andthat, in particular, German philosophy is a consequence of German petty-bourgeois conditions. Thephilosophers have only to dissolve their language into the ordinary language, from which it is abstracted,in order to recognize it as the distorted language of the actual world and to realize that neither thoughtsnor language in themselves form a realm of their own, that they are only manifestations of actual life.p. 472-3We have seen that the whole problem of the transition from thought to reality, hence from language tolife, exists only in philosophical illusion, i.e., it is justified only for philosophical consciousness, whichcannot possibly be clear about the nature and origin of its apparent separation from life. This greatproblem, insofar as it at all entered the minds of our ideologists, was bound, of course, to result of finelyin one of these knights-errant setting out in search of a word which, as a word , formed the transition inquestion, which, as a word, ceases to be simply a word, and which, as a word, in a mysterious superlinguistic manner, points from within the language to the actual object it denotes; which, in short, playsamong words the same role as the Redeeming God-Man plays among people in Christian fantasy. Theemptiest, shallowest brain among the philosophers had to "end" philosophy by proclaiming his lack ofthought to be the end of philosophy and thus the triumphant entry into "corporal" life. His philosophizingmental vacuity was already in itself the end of philosophy just as his unspeakable language was the endof all language.p. 475  

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (5 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




Individuality

 Critique: "humans create themselves out of nothing"Far from it being true that "out of nothing" I make myself, for example, a "[public] speaker", the nothingwhich forms the basis here is a very manifold something, the real individual, his speech organs, a definitestage of physical development, an existing language and dialects, ears capable of hearing and a humanenvironment from which it is possible to hear something, etc., etc. therefore, in the development of aproperty something is created by something out of something, and by no means comes, as in Hegel'sLogic , from nothing, through nothing to nothing. [Th. I. Abt. 2 of Hegel]p. 162

Individualism in a class perspectiveWhen the narrowminded bourgeois says to the Communists: by abolishing property, i.e., my existence asa capitalist, as a landed proprietor, as a factory owner, and your existence as workers, you abolished myindividuality and your own; by making it impossible for me to exploit you, the workers, to rake in myprofit, interest or rent, you make it impossible for me to exist as an individual.When, therefore, the bourgeois tells the Communists: by abolishing my existence as the bourgeois , youabolish my existence as an individual ; when thus he identifies himself as a bourgeois with himself as anindividual, one must, at least, recognize his frankness and shamelessness. For the bourgeois it is actuallythe case, he believes himself to be an individual only in so far as he is a bourgeois.But when the theoreticians of the bourgeoisie come forward and give a general expression to thisassertion, when they equate the bourgeois's property with individuality in theory as well and want to givea logical justification for this equation, then this nonsense begins to become solemn and holy.p. 246

The relation of individual interests to class interests[Sancho asks:] How is it that personal interests always develop, against the will of individuals, into classinterests, into common interests which acquire independent existence in relation to the individualpersons, and in their independence assume the form of general interests? How is it that as such theycome into contradiction with the actual individuals and in this contradiction, by which they are defined asgeneral interests, they can be conceived by consciousness as ideal and even as religious, holy interests?How is it that in this process of private interests acquiring independent existence as class interests thepersonal behavior of the individual is bound to be objectified [sich versachlichen], estranged [sichentfremden], and at the same time exists as a power independent of him and without him, created byintercourse, and is transformed into social relations, into a series of powers which determined andsubordinate the individual, in which, therefore, appear in the imagination as "holy" powers?

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (6 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




Had Sancho understood the fact that within the framework of definite modes of production , which, ofcourse, are not dependent on the will, alien practical forces, which are independent not only of isolatedindividuals but even of all of them together, always come to stand above people — then he could befairly indifferent as to whether this fact is preserved in the religious form or distorted in the fancy of theegoist, above whom everything is placed in imagination, in such a way that he places nothing abovehimself. Sancho would then have descended from the realm of speculation into the realm of reality, fromwhat people fancy to what they actually are, from what they imagine to how they act and are bound to actin definite circumstances. What seems to him a product of thought , he would have understood to be aproduct of life . He would not then have arrived at the absurdity worthy of him — of explaining thedivision between personal and general interests by saying that people imagine this division also in areligious way and seem to themselves to be such and such, which is, however, only another word for"imagining".Incidentally, even in the banal, petty-bourgeois German form in which Sancho perceives contradiction ofpersonal and general interests, he should realize that individuals have always started out fromthemselves, and could not do otherwise, and that therefore the two aspects he noted are aspects of thepersonal development of individuals; both are equally engendered by the empirical conditions underwhich the individuals live, both are only expressions of one and the same personal development ofpeople and are therefore only in seeming contradiction to each other.p. 262-3

The role of will in the desires of an individualWhether a desire becomes fixed or not, i.e., whether it obtains exclusive [power over us] — which,however, does [not] exclude [further progress] — depends on whether material circumstances, "bad"mundane conditions permit the normal satisfaction of this desire and, on the other hand, the developmentof a totality of desires. This latter depends, in turn, on whether we live in circumstances that allowall-round activity and thereby the full development of all our potentialities. On the actual conditions, andthe possibility of development they give each individual, depends also whether thoughts become fixed ornot — just as, for example, the fixed ideas of the German philosophers, these "victims of society", quinous font pitie [for whom we feel pity], are inseparable from the German conditions.An avaricious person is not an owner, but a servant, and he can do nothing for his own sake without atthe same time doing it for the sake of his master."No one can do anything without at the same time doing it for the sake of one or other of his needs and forthe sake of the organ of this need — for Stirner this means that this need and its organ are made into amaster over him, just as earlier he made the means for satisfying a need into a master over him. Stirnercannot eat without at the same time eating for the sake of his stomach. If the worldly conditions preventhim from satisfying his stomach, then his stomach becomes a master over him, the desire to eat becomesa fixed desire, and the thought of eating becomes a fixed idea — which at the same time gives him anexample of the influence of world conditions and fixing his desires and ideas. Sancho's "revolt" againstthe fixation of desires and thoughts is thus reduced to an impotent moral injunction about self-control andprovides new evidence that he merely gives an ideologically high sounding expression to the most trivialsentiments of the petty-bourgeois.

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (7 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




[The following two paragraphs are crossed out in the manuscript, likely because the authors did not feelthey fit into context and not because of their content (brackets are used for words that were illegible)]:Since they attack the material basis on which the hitherto inevitable fixedness of desires and ideasdepended, the Communists are the only people through whose historical activity the liquefaction of thefixed desires and ideas is in fact brought about and ceases to be an impotent moral injunction, as it wasup to now with all moralists "down to" Stirner. Communist organization has a twofold effect on thedesires produced in the individual by present-day relations; some of these desires — namely desireswhich exist under all relations, and only change their form and direction under different social relations— are merely altered by the Communist social system, for they are given the opportunity to developnormally; but others — namely those originating solely in a particular society, under particularconditions of [production] and intercourse — are totally deprived of their conditions of existence. Which[of the desires] will be merely changed and [which eliminated] in a Communist [society] can [only occurin a practical] way, by [changing the real], actual [conditions of production and intercourse.]A desire is already by its mere existence something "fixed", and it can occur only to St. Max and his likenot to allow his sex instinct, for instance, to become "fixed"; it is that already and will cease to be fixedonly as a result of castration or impotence. Each need, which forms the basis of a "desire", is likewisesomething "fixed", and try as he may St. Max cannot abolish this "fixedness" and for example contrive tofree himself from the necessity of eating within "fixed" periods of time. The Communists have nointention of abolishing the fixedness of their desires and needs, an intention which Stirner, immersed inhis world of fancy, ascribes to them and all other men; they only strive to achieve an organization ofproduction and intercourse which will make possible the normal satisfaction of all needs, i.e., asatisfaction which is limited only by the needs themselves.p. 272-3

Individuality in thought and desireIt depends not on consciousness , but on being ; not on thought, but on life; it depends on the individual'sempirical development and manifestation of life, which in turn depends on the conditions existing in theworld.If the circumstances in which the individual lives allow him only the [one]-sided development of onequality at the expense of all the rest, [if] they give him the material and time to develop only that onequality, then this individual achieves only a one-sided, crippled development. No moral preaching availshere. And the manner in which this one, preeminently favored quality develops depends again, on theone hand, on the material available for its development and, on the other hand, on the degree and mannerin which the other qualities are suppressed.Precisely because thought, for example, is the thought of a particular, definite individual, it remains hisdefinite thought, determined by his individuality in the conditions in which he lives. The thinkingindividual therefore has no need to resort to prolonged reflection about thought as such in order todeclare that his thought is his own thought, his property; from the outset it is his own, peculiarlydetermined thought and it was precisely his peculiarity which [in the case of St.] Sancho [was found tobe] the "opposite" of this, the peculiarity which is peculiar " as such ".

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (8 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




In the case of an individual, for example, whose life embraces a wide circle of varied activities andpractical relations to the world, and who, therefore, lives a many-sided life, thought has the samecharacter of universality as every other manifestation of his life. Consequently, it neither becomes fixedin the form of abstract thought nor does it need complicated tricks of reflection when the individualpasses from thought to some other manifestation of life. From the outset it is always a factor in the totallife of the individual, one which disappears and is reproduced as required .In the case of a parochial Berlin schoolmaster or author, however, whose activity is restricted to arduouswork on the one hand and the pleasure of thought on the other, whose world extends from [the smallconfines of their city], whose relations to this world are reduced to a minimum by his pitiful position inlife, when such an individual experiences the need to think, it is indeed inevitable that his thoughtbecomes just as abstract as he himself and his life, and that thought confronts him, who is quite incapableof resistance, in the form of a fixed power, whose activity offers the individual the possibility of amomentary escape from his "bad world", of a momentary pleasure.In the case of such an individual the few remaining desires, which arise not so much from intercoursewith a world as from the constitution of the human body, expressed themselves only throughrepercussion , i.e., they assume their narrow development the same one-sided and crude character asdoes his thought, they appear only along intervals, stimulated by the excessive development of thepredominant desire (fortified by immediate physical causes, e.g., [stomach] spasm) and are manifestedturbulently and forcibly, with the most brutal suppression of the ordinary, [natural] desire [— this leadsto further] domination over [thought.] As a matter of course, the schoolmaster's [thinking reflects on andspeculates about] is empirical [fact in a school] masterly fashion.p. 280-1

Needs being the vocation of all human beingsFor St. Sancho vocation has a double form; firstly as a vocation which others choose for me — examplesof which we have already had above in the case of newspapers that are full of politics and the prisons thatour Saint mistook for houses of moral correction. Afterward vocation appears also as a vocation in whichthe individual himself believes.If the ego is divorced from all its empirical conditions of life, it's activity, the conditions of its existence,if it is separated from the world that forms its basis and from its own body, then, of course, it has noother vocation and no other designation than that of representing the human being of the logicalproposition and to assist St. Sancho in arriving at the equations given above.In the real world, on the other hand, where individuals have needs, they thereby already have a vocationand task ; and at the outset it is still immaterial whether they make this their vocation in their imaginationas well. It is clear, however, that because the individuals possess consciousness they form an idea of thisvocation which their empirical existence has given them and, thus, furnish St. Sancho with theopportunity of seizing on the word vocation, that is, on the mental expression of their actual conditions oflife, and of leading out of account these conditions of life themselves.The proletarian, for example, who like every human being has the vocation of satisfying his needs andwho is not in a position to satisfy even the needs that he has in common with all human beings, the

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (9 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




proletarian whom the necessity to work a 14 hour day debases to the level of the beast of burden, whomcompetition degrades to a mere thing, an article of trade, who from his position as a mere productiveforce, the sole position left to him, is squeezed out by other, more powerful productive forces — thisproletarian is, if only for these reasons, confronted with the real task of revolutionizing his conditions. Hecan, of course, imagine this to be his "vocation", he can also, if he likes to engage in propaganda, expresshis "vocation" by saying that to do this or that is the human vocation of the proletarian, the more so sincehis position does not even allow him to satisfy the needs arising directly from his human nature. St.Sancho does not concern himself with the reality underlining this idea, with the practical name of thisproletarian — he clings to the word "vocation" and declares it to be the holy, and the proletarian to be aservant of the holy — the easiest way of considering himself superior and "proceeding further".Particularly in the relations that have existed hitherto, when one class always ruled, when the conditionsof life of an individual always coincided with the conditions of life of a class, when, therefore, thepractical task of each newly emerging class was bound to appear to each of its members as a universaltask, and when each class could actually overthrow its predecessor only by liberating the individuals ofall classes from certain chains which had hitherto fettered them — under these circumstances it wasessential that the task of the individual members of a class striving for domination should be described asa universal human task.Incidentally, when for example the bourgeois tells the proletarian that his, the proletarian's, human task isto work 14 hours a day, the proletarian is quite justified in replying in the same language that, on thecontrary, his task is to overthrow the entire bourgeois system.p. 305-7"Vocation, designation, task, ideal" are either:1. The idea of the revolutionary tasks laid down for an oppressed class by the material conditions; or2. Mere idealistic paraphrases, or also the conscious expression of the individuals' modes of activitywhich owing to the division of labour have assumed independent existence as various professions; or3. The conscious expression of the necessity which at every moment confronts individuals, classes andnations to assert their position through some quite definite activity; or4. The conditions of existence of the ruling class (as determined by the preceding development ofproduction), ideally expressed in law, morality, etc., to which [conditions] the ideologists of that classmore or less consciously gave a sort of theoretical independence; they can be conceived by separateindividuals of that class as vocation, etc., and are held up as a standard of life to the individuals of theoppressed class, partly as an intelligent or recognition of domination, partly as the moral means for thisdomination. It is to be noted here, as in general with ideologists, that they inevitably put a thingupside-down and regard their ideology both as the creative force and as the aim of all social relations,whereas it is only an expression and symptom of these relations.p. 444

The role of individual will in the foundation of the state

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (10 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




In actual history, those theoreticians who regarded might as the basis of right were in direct contradiction

to those who looked on will as the basis of right... If power is taken as the basis of right, as Hobbes, etc.,do, then right, law, etc., are merely the symptom, the expression of other relations upon which statepower rests.The material life of individuals, which by no means depends merely on their "will", their mode ofproduction and form of intercourse, which mutually determined each other — this is the real basis of thestate and remained so at all the stages at which division of labor and private property are still necessary,quite independently of the will of individuals. These actual relations are in no way created by the statepower; on the contrary they are the power creating it.The individuals who rule in these conditions — leaving aside the fact that their power must assume theform of the state — have to give their will, which is determined by these definite conditions, a universalexpression as the will of the state, as law, an expression whose content is always determined by therelations of this class, as the civil and criminal law demonstrates in the clearest possible way. Just as theweight of their bodies does not depend on there idealistic will or on their arbitrary decision, so also thefact that they enforce their own will in the form of law, and at the same time to make it independent ofthe personal arbitrariness of each individual among them, does not depend on there idealistic will.Their personal rule must at the same time assume the form of average rule. Their personal power is basedon conditions of life which as they develop are common to many individuals, and the continuance ofwhich they, as ruling individuals, have to maintain against others and, at the same time, to maintain thatthey are holding good for everybody. The expression of this will, which is determined by their commoninterests, is the law.It is precisely because individuals who are independent of one another assert themselves and their ownwill, and because on this basis their attitude to one another is bound to be egoistical, that self-denial ismade necessary in law and right, self-denial in the exceptional case, in self-assertion of their interests inthe average case (which, therefore, not they , but only the "egoist in agreement with himself" regards asself-denial). The same applies to the classes which are ruled, whose will plays just as small a part indetermining the existence of law and the state.For example, so long as the productive forces are still insufficiently developed to make competitionsuperfluous, and therefore would give rise to competition over and over again, for so long the classeswhich are ruled would be wanting to be impossible if they had the "will" to abolish competition and withit the state and the law. Incidentally, too, it is only in the imagination of the ideologists that this "will"arises before relations have developed far enough to make the emergence of such a will possible. Afterrelations have developed sufficiently to produce it, the ideologist is able to imagine this will as beingpurely arbitrary and therefore as conceivable at all times and under all circumstances.Like right, so crime, i.e., the struggle of the isolated individual against the predominant relations, is notthe result of pure arbitrariness. On the contrary, it depends on the same conditions as that domination.The same visionaries who see in right and law the domination of some independently existing generalwill see in crime the mere violation of right and along. Hence the state does not exist owing to thedominant will, but the state, which arises from the material mode of life of individuals, has also the formof a dominant will. If the latter loses its domination, it means that not only the will has changed but alsothe material existence and life of individuals, and only for that reason has their will changed. It ispossible for rights and laws to be "inherited", but in that case they are no longer dominant, but nominal,

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (11 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




of which striking examples are furnished by the history of ancient Roman law and English law.We saw earlier how a theory and history of pure thought could arise among philosophers owning to theseparation of ideas from the individuals and empirical relations which serve as the basis of these ideas. Inthe same way, here too one can separate right from its real basis, whereby one obtains a "dominant will"which in different eras undergoes various modifications and has its own, independent history in itscreations, the laws. On this account, political and civil history becomes ideologically merged in a historyof the domination of successive laws.... The most superficial examination of legislation, e.g., for lawsand all countries, shows how far the rulers got when they imagined that they could achieve something bymeans of their "dominant will" alone, i.e., simply by exercising their will.p. 348-50

Individuals and their relationshipsEven that which constitutes the advantage of an individual as such over other individuals, is in our day atthe same time a product of society and in its realization is bound to assert itself as privilege, as we have

already shown Sancho in connection with competition. Further, the individual as such, regarded byhimself, is subordinated to division of labour, which makes him one-sided, cripples and determines him.Individuals have always and in all circumstances "proceeded from themselves ", but since they were notunique in the sense of not needing any connections with one another, and since their needs , consequentlytheir nature, and the method of satisfying their needs, connected them with one another (relationsbetween the sexes, exchange, division of labour), they had to enter into relations with one another.Moreover, since they entered into intercourse with one another not as pure egos, but as individuals at adefinite stage of development of their productive forces and requirements, and since this intercourse, inits turn, determined production and needs, it was, therefore, precisely the personal, individual behavior ofindividuals, their behavior to one another as individuals, that created the existing relations and dailyreproduces them anew. They entered into intercourse with one another as what they were, they proceeded"from themselves", as they were, irrespective of their "outlook onlife".This "outlook on life" — even the warped one of the [idealist] philosophers — could, of course, only bedetermined by their actual life. Hence it certainly follows that the development of an individual isdetermined by the development of all the others with whom he is directly or indirectly associative, andthat the different generations of individuals entering into relations with one another are connected withone another, that the physical existence of the latter generations is determined by that of theirpredecessors, and that these later generations inherit the productive forces and forms of intercourseaccumulated by their predecessors, their own mutual relations being determined thereby. In short, it isclear that development takes place and that the history of the single individual cannot possibly beseparated from the history of preceding or contemporary individuals, but is determined by this history.The transformation of the individual relationship into its opposite, a purely material relationship, thedistinction of individuality and fortuity by the individuals themselves is a historical process, as we have

already shown ( Chapter 1, Part IV, § 6 ), and at different stages of development it assumes different,ever sharper and more universal forms.In the present epoch, the domination of material relations over individuals, and the suppression of

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (12 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




individuality by fortuitous circumstances, has assumed its sharpest and most universal form, therebysetting existing individuals a very definite task. It has set them the task of replacing the domination ofcircumstances and a chance over individuals by the domination of individuals over chance andcircumstances. It has not, as Sancho imagines, put forward the demand that "I should develop myself",which up to now every individual has done without Sancho's good advice; it has on the contrary calledfor liberation from a quite definite mode of development. This task, dictated by present-day relations,coincides with the task of organizing society in the Communist way.We have already shown above that the abolition of a state of affairs in which relations becomeindependent of individuals, in which individuality is subservient to chance and the personal relations ofindividuals are subordinated to general class relations, etc. — that the abolition of this state of affairs isdetermined in the final analysis by the abolition of division of labour. We also shown that the abolition ofdivision of labour is determined by the development of intercourse and productive forces to such adegree of universality that private property and division of labour becomes fetters on them. We havefurther shown that private property can be abolished only on condition of an all-around development ofindividuals, precisely because the existing form of intercourse and the existing productive forces are allembracing and only individuals that are developing in an all-around fashion can appropriate them, i.e.,can turn them into free manifestations of their lives. We have shown that at the present time individualsmust abolish private property, because the productive forces and forms of intercourse have developed sofar that, under the domination of private property, they have become destructive forces, and because thecontradiction between the classes has reached its extreme limit. Finally, we have shown that the abolitionof private property in the division of labour is itself the association of individuals on the basis created bymodern productive forces and world's intercourse. [See Chapter One]Within Communist society, the only society in which the genuine and free development of individualsceases to be a mere phrase, this development is determined precisely by the connection of individuals, aconnection which consists partly in the economic prerequisites and partly in the necessary solidarity ofthe free development of all, and finally, in the universal character of the activity of individuals on thebasis of the existing productive forces. We are, therefore, here concerned with individuals at a definitehistorical stage of development and by no means merely with individuals chosen at random, evendisregarding the indispensable Communist revolution, which itself is a general condition for their freedevelopment. The individuals' consciousness of their mutual relations will, of course, likewise becompletely changed, and, therefore, will no more be the "principal of love" or devoument than it will beegoism.p. 463-5  

Miscellaneous

 The Family

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (13 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




[In the family] entirely empirical relations dominate. The attitude of the bourgeois to the institutions ofhis regime is like that of the Jew to the law; he evades them whenever it is possible to do so in eachindividual case, but he wants everyone else to observe them. If the entire bourgeoisie, in a mass and atone time, were to evade bourgeois institutions, it would cease to be bourgeois — a conduct which, ofcourse, never occurs to the bourgeois and by no means depends on their willing or running [i.e., it isdictated by historical conditions]. The dissolute bourgeois evades marriage and secretly commitsadultery; the merchant evades the institution of property by depriving others of property by speculation,bankruptcy, etc.; the young bourgeois makes himself independent of his family, if he can by in factabolishing the family as far as he is concerned.But marriage, property, the family remain untouched in theory, because they are the practical basis onwhich the bourgeoisie has directed its domination, and because in their bourgeois form they are theconditions which make the bourgeois a bourgeois, just as the constantly evaded law makes the religiousJew a religious Jew. This attitude of the bourgeois to the conditions of his existence acquires one of itsuniversal forms in bourgeois mentality. One cannot speak at all of the family " as such ". Historically thebourgeois gives the family the character of the bourgeois family, in which boredom and money are thebinding link, in which also includes the bourgeois dissolution of the family, which does not prevent thefamily itself from always continuing to exist. It's dirty existence as its counterpart in the holy concept ofit in official phraseology and universal hypocrisy.Where the family is actually abolished, as with the proletariat, just the opposite of what "Stirner" thinkstakes place. Then the concept of the family does not exist at all, but here and there family affection basedon extremely real relations is certainly to be found.In the 18th-century the concept of the [feudal] family was abolished by the philosophers, because theactual family was already in the process of dissolution at the highest pinnacles of civilization. Theinternal family bond, the separate components constituting the concept of the family were dissolved, forexample, obedience, piety, fidelity in marriage, etc.; but the real body the family, the property relation,the exclusive attitude in relation to their families, forced cohabitation — relations determined by theexistence of children, the structure of modern towns, the formation of capital, etc. — all these werepreserved, along with numerous violations, because the existence of the family is made necessary by itsconnection with the mode of production, which exists independently of the will of bourgeois society.That it was impossible to do without it was demonstrated in the most striking way during the FrenchRevolution, when for a moment the family was as good as legally abolished. The family continues toexist even in the 19th-century, only the process of its dissolution has become more general, not onaccount of the concept, but because of the higher development of industry and competition; the familystill exists although its dissolution was long ago proclaimed by French and English Socialists and this has

at last penetrated also to the German church fathers, by way of French novels.[A]p. 194-5

[A] The sarcasm of Marx and Engels may not be retained in this shortened form; this statement issaracastic. Marx and Engels are explaining that ideas and novels alone cannot change the fact; only realchanges in the relations of production, i.e. only through the establishment of communism, will the familyactually be abolished.

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (14 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




Consciousness changing with the development of societyThe more the normal form of intercourse of society, and with it the conditions of the ruling class, developtheir contradiction to the advanced productive forces, and the greater the consequent discord within theruling class itself as well as between it and the class ruled by it, the more fictitious, of course, becomesthe consciousness which originally corresponded to this form of intercourse (i.e., it ceases to be theconsciousness corresponding to this form of intercourse), and the more do the old traditional ideas ofthese relations of intercourse, in which actual private interests, etc., etc., are expressed as universalinterests, descend to the level of mere idealizing phrases, conscious illusion, deliberate hypocrisy. But themore their falsity is exposed by life, and the less meaning they have to consciousness itself, the moreresolutely are they asserted, the more hypocritical, moral and holy becomes the language of this normalsociety.p. 310

Freeing laborThe modern state, the rule of the bourgeoisie, is based on freedom of labour .... Freedom of Labour isfree competition of the workers among themselves.... Labor is free in all civilized countries; it is not amatter of freeing labor but of abolishing it.p. 220-221Free activity for the Communists is the creative manifestation of life arising from the free developmentof all abilities of the whole person.p. 242

Communists on selfishness and selflessnesCommunists do not oppose egoism to selflessness or selflessness to egoism, nor do they express thiscontradiction theoretically either in its sentimental or in its highflown ideological form; they ratherdemonstrate its material source, with which it disappears of itself. The Communists do not preachmorality at all.They do not put to people the moral demand: love one another, do not be egoists, etc.; on the contrary,they are very well aware that egoism, just as much selflessness, is in definite circumstances a necessaryform of the self-assertion of individuals. Hence, the Communists by no means want to do away with the"private individual" for the sake of the "general", selfless man. That is a statement of the imagination.Communist theoreticians, the only Communists who have time to devote to the study of history, aredistinguished precisely by the fact that they alone have discovered that throughout history the "generalinterest" is created by individuals who are defined as "private persons". They know that this contradictionis only a seeming one because one side of it, what is called the "general interest", is constantly beingproduced by the other side, private interest, and in relation to the latter is by no means an independentforce with an independent history — so that this contradiction is in practice constantly destroyed andreproduced. Hence it is not a question of the Hegelian "negative unity" of two sides of the contradiction,

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (15 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




but of the materially determined destruction of the preceding materially determined mode of life ofindividuals, with the disappearance of which this contradiction together with its unity also disappears.p. 264-5

Alienation due to private propertyPrivate property alienates the individuality not only of people but also of things. Land has nothing to dowith rent of land, the machine has nothing to do with profit. For the landed proprietor, land has thesignificance only of rent of land; he leases his plots of land and receives rent; this is a feature which landcan lose without losing a single one of its inherent features, without, for example, losing any part of itsfertility; it is a feature the extent and even the existence of which depends on social relations which arecreated and destroyed without the assistance of individual landed proprietors. It is the same withmachines. How little connection there is between money, the most general form of property, and personalpeculiarity, how much they are directly opposed to each other was already known to Shakespeare betterthan to our theorizing petty-bourgeois:Thus much of this will make black, white; foul, fair;Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant.This yellow slave...Will make the hoar leprosy adored...This it isThat makes the wappened widow wed again;She, whom the spittle-house and ulcerous soresWould cast the gorge at, this embalms and spicesTo th' April day again...Thou visible god,That solder'st close impossibilities,And makest them kiss![William Shakespeare, Timon of Athens , Act IV, Scene III.]In a word, rent of land, profit, etc., these forms of existence of private property, are social relationscorresponding to a definite stage of production, and they are "individual" only so long as they have notbecome fetters on the existing productive forces.p. 247-8

The relation of the bourgeois to the capitalist stateWith the development and accumulation of bourgeois property, i.e., with the development of commerceand industry, individuals grew richer and richer while the state fell ever more deeply into debt.It is therefore obvious that as soon as the bourgeoisie has accumulated money, the state has to beg fromthe bourgeoisie and in the end it is actually bought up by the latter. This takes place in the period inwhich the bourgeoisie is still confronted by another class, and consequently the state can retain some

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (16 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




appearance of independence in relation to both of them. Even after the state has been bought up [byspecial trusts, interest groups, lobbying, bribes, etc.], it still needs money and, therefore, continues to bedependent on the bourgeoisie; nevertheless, when the interests of the bourgeoisie demanded, the state canhave had its disposal more funds then states which are less developed and, therefore, less burdened withdebts.p. 382

On CompetitionThose relations brought about by competition: the abolition of local narrowness, the establishment ofmeans of communication, highly developed division of Labour, world intercourse, the proletariat,machinery, the relation between supply and demand, etc. *As for the proletarians, they — at any rate in the modern form — first arose out of competition; theyhave already repeatedly set up collected enterprises which, however, always perish because they wereunable to compete with the "contending" private bankers, butchers, etc., and because for proletarians —owing to the frequent opposition of interests among them arising out of the division of labour — no other"agreement" is possible than a political one directed against the whole present system. Where thedevelopment of competition enables the proletarians to "come to an understanding", they reach anunderstanding not about public bakeries but about quite different matters [,i.e. the overthrow of thebourgeois system for a proletarian one.].p. 392-3* A minor grammatical alteration of the text

Personal CompetitionIncidentally, competition certainly began as a "competition of persons" possessing "personal means".The liberation of the feudal serfs, the first condition of competition, and the first accumulation of"things" were purely "personal" acts.If one person, thanks to good food, careful education and physical exercise, has acquired well-developedbodily powers and skill, while another, owing to inadequate and unhealthy food and consequent poordigestion, and as the result of neglect in childhood and overexertion, has never been able to acquire the"things" necessary for developing his muscles — not to mention acquiring mastery over them — withinthe "personal power" of the first in relation to the second is a purely material one. It was not "throughpersonal power" that he gained the "means that were lacking"; on the contrary, he owes his "personalpower" to the material means already existing.Incidentally, the transformation of personal means into material means and of material means intopersonal means is only an aspect of competition and quite inseparable from it. The demand thatcompetition should be conducted not with material means but with personal means amounts to the moralpostulate that competition and the relations on which it depends should have consequences other thanthose inevitably arising from them.p. 397-8

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (17 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




The monetary crisisThe power of money, the fact that the universal means of exchange becomes independent in relation bothto society and to individuals, reveals most clearly that the relations of production and intercourse as awhole assume an independent existence....The material power of money, which is strikingly revealed in monetary crisis and which, in the form of aprominent scarcity of money, oppresses the petty-bourgeois who is "inclined to make purchases", islikewise a highly unpleasant fact for that egoist [a reference to Sancho] in agreement with himself. Hegets rid of the difficulty by reversing the ordinary idea of the petty-bourgeois, thus making it appear thatthe attitude of individuals to the power of money is something that depends solely on their personalwilling or running. This fortunate turn of thought then gives him the chance of reading a moral lecture,buttressed by synonymy, etymology and vowel mutation, to the astounded petty-bourgeois alreadydisheartening by lack of money, and thus debarring in advance all inconvenient questions about thecauses of the pecuniary embarrassment.The monetary crisis consist primarily in the fact that all "wealth" [vermogen] suddenly becomesdepreciated in relation to the means of exchange and loses its "power" [vermogen] over money. A crisisis in existence precisely when one can no longer pay with one's "wealth"[vermogen], but must pay withmoney. And this again does not happen because of a shortage of money, as is imagined by thepetty-bourgeois who judges the crisis by his personal difficulties, but because the specific differencebecomes fixed between money and as the universal commodity, the "marketable property and property incirculation", and all the other, particular commodities, which suddenly ceased to be marketable property.p. 419-20

Table of Contents: The German Ideology

The German Ideology — Ch 3http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845-gi/ch03.htm (18 of 18) [23/08/2000 16:34:18]




