Environmental justice (EJ) research and activism have historically relied on mapping as a visual representation of the uneven burdens of waste disposal and processing borne by marginalized communities. In particular, mapping has been an effective tool for illustrating the concentration of toxic materials in low income and minority neighborhoods (Margai 2001, Higgs and Langford 2009, Lara-Valencia et al. 2009, Raddatz and Mennis 2013) and identifying clusters of high asthma or cancer rates associated with exposure to particulates (Buzzelli and Jerrett 2003, McEntee and Ogneva-Himmelberger 2008). In this paper, we build on this impressive body of scholarship by enacting an “undisciplined” approach to EJ research and education that unites diverse epistemological approaches around the problem of the transnational hazardous waste trade1 in North America. Despite its size and potential risks to public and environmental health, there are limited data regarding the impacts of the trade on specific localities or communities. The dearth of publicly available data makes it nearly impossible to meaningfully visualize the trade and any attendant EJ concerns. To determine the spatial distribution of hazardous materials, identify local waste havens, and start to unravel the complex drivers of the waste trade, we have therefore assembled a novel dataset through a set of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) [blinded]. Once these data were assembled, however, the stories that they could tell remained buried in and between the lines of the massive spreadsheet they populated. As is the case for the mapping and visualization of any dataset, big or small; the data cannot simply “speak for themselves”.As one strategy to decipher meaning in these data -- and to facilitate an undisciplined conversation about EJ and visualization broadly -- we convened a one day “Design Challenge” (DC) at the [blinded]. Participants came to the challenge with a range of experience, interests, and skills, providing a useful example of the opportunities and challenges of transdisciplinary research and education. Rather than visualize clusters and correlations in aggregate across the dataset, participants were instructed to find interesting and unique stories in the dataset and given limited further direction on how to proceed. In this way, our focus was not solely on using mapping and visualization as the traditional product of EJ research, but also as a process for raising new lines of inquiry into the social and environmental dynamics at work in the landscape. The DC was successful in meeting the goal of generating visualizations and stories that pushed our project in new directions, and was generally well-received as a non-traditional complement to formal classroom instruction. Given our interest to extend the Design Challenge as a method for transdisciplinary research and teaching, we conducted a set of follow-up interviews with participants one year following the event to reflect on the experience. The interviews captured many take-home lessons that continue to resonate with participants after starting their professional careers or continuing their education, and revealed tensions in the DC as an experiment in collaborative transdisciplinary research and teaching.In what follows, we first discuss the use of mapping and visualization in EJ research, relevant issues in big data visualization and visual storytelling, and opportunities for undisciplined pedagogy. Next, we describe our case study including the DC event and follow-up interviews with participants one year later. We then summarize the results of the case study, including new avenues for exploration of international environmental justice research on issues associated with the transnational waste trade, methods for and concerns with critical storytelling with big datasets, and opportunities and challenges of working and teaching transdisciplinarily. We conclude in the final section that the DC as a process and event was successful in helping the project to creatively visualize slices of the big dataset and pursue compelling stories that might provide new roads for EJ research, and suggest additional strategies for engaging with undisciplined EJ research and teaching. 2. Undisciplining Environmental Justice through Visualization Environmental justice research has used maps to make visible and critique the spatial correlations between hazardous waste disposal sites and poor and minority communities for decades (Berry 1977, US GAO 1983, Bullard 1990). The 1987 United Church of Christ (UCC) report, “Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States,” was a landmark investigation into the geographic distribution of hazardous waste sites that found striking correlations between racial minorities captured at a zipcode level in US Census data and the location of commercial, third-party facilities disposing of waste for profit. Since the UCC report, EJ visualization has expanded to incorporate a range of spatial analyses that identify statistical relationships among the location of hazardous waste, the race or socioeconomic status of populations living near hazardous waste disposal and processing sites, and, when possible, their health outcomes (for reviews, see Bowen 2002, Reed and George 2011). Such studies generally involve three stages of research: 1) gathering data from a number of public sources, such as the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) of air, land, and water emissions of a variety of chemicals, 2) performing statistical analysis, and 3) visualizing results.  Methods such as proximity analysis (i.e., buffering) and spatial coincidence are commonly used to make sense of these datasets (e.g., Lowry et al. 1995, Lovett et al. 1997, Sheppard et al. 1999, Verter and Kara 2001, Maantay 2002, Mennis 2002, Kara and Verter 2004, Mohai and Saha 2007). Many traditional EJ studies are therefore disciplined by separate and sequential steps that drive towards a product, documenting aggregated spatial clusters and correlations that may or may not be meaningful (Bullard et al. 2007, Mennis 2002, Robbins 2008).While such products have proven useful for EJ research and activism, critical scholars have argued that environmental justice must be understood as a structural – historical, contested, and spatially varied --process (Pulido 1996, 2000, 2015; Holifield 2004; Heiman 1996) that may not be fully captured in traditional maps. In line with feminist critiques of GIS and geographic visualization that raise crucial questions of erasure: who is missing from the data, from the analysis, and the map (Schuurman 2000, Cope and Elwood 2009, Leszczynski and Elwood, 2015), critical scholars have argued that mapping geographic patterns or spatial correlations leaves out the political economic drivers of EJ issues (Pulido 1996, 2000). For instance, in an influential article, Pulido (2000) both correlates sites in the TRI with minority neighborhoods and provides a historical narrative to highlight the underlying political economic drivers producing environmental racism in Los Angeles: decades of discriminatory housing practices, suburbanization and white flight, and industrialization and deindustrialization. Our approach to mapping the hazardous waste trade uses modes of visualization common to EJ research in products that demonstrate problematic clusters and correlations, but also employs visualization as a process for raising undisciplined lines of inquiry that are not constrained to the original research questions or approach (Kitchin and Dodge 2007). In this way, we argue that visualizations are not simply something that work for environmental justice and other geographic problems (MacEachren 1995), but are always at work, shaping discourse and helping to forge research agendas. Our approach aligns with calls to “undiscipline” cartography and visualization more generally (Crampton and Krygier 2005: 12) wherein increasingly available mapping tools, combined with critiques of historically dominant mapping practices, “resist and challenge the received method and practice of mapping established when cartography became an academic discipline.” For an undisciplined EJ, we argue that visualization as process offers the potential to illuminate the complexity of local and global drivers of uneven exposure to risk in ways including, but also moving beyond, traditional products.      2.1 Visualization for Small EJ Stories from Big DataTraditional EJ analyses are also often hampered by inconsistent, outdated, or incomplete data (e.g., Maantay 2002; Verter and Kara 2001; Mennis 2002; Maantay 2007; Lowry et al. 1995; Kara and Verter 2004; Lepawsky and McNabb 2010). Such escalating data uncertainty can shake confidence in resulting visualizations (MacEachren et al. 2005), potentially impeding transparent discussion, decision-making, and regulation.[1][SM2][SM3] One response to such issues has been to increasingly frame management and regulation of hazardous waste as a “big data” problem. Big data are not just voluminous in size: they can also be disparate in source, heterogeneous in content, and uncertain in quality (Li et al. 2016). While big data can grow to the petabytes and beyond, the use of the term “big data” typically is evoked whenever the dataset extends beyond the abilities of the analyst or the capabilities of traditional computing technologies to make sense of the data (Robinson et al. forthcoming). Environmental sensors for air and water quality blanket the landscape, millions of health care records are collected daily, and gaps in authoritative data can be crowdsourced through citizens (Gandy 1993, Goodchild 2007, MacEachren et al. 2011, Leszczynski and Elwood, 2015, Tsou 2015). Some claim that big data enable “precision” responses to health and risk disparities (Khoury et al. in press). In fact, at time of writing, the EPA is initiating a switch from annual paper-based to real-time electronic reporting of hazardous waste transactions that it claims will facilitate this kind of data-driven action (EPA 2016).Yet, the recent rush to integrate big data into such areas as environmental regulation has been critiqued from several perspectives. First, scholars have problematized the algorithmic mining and visualization of big data as “Positivism 2.0” (Muehlenhaus 2014), since data large and small are a product of the interests and biases of its creators, and thus cannot “speak for themselves” (Gould 1981, Haraway 1988, Martin 1991, Boyd and Crawford 2012, Kitchin 2014). In response to such “naive empiricism” (Burns and Thatcher 2015), critics have called for “critical quantifications” that allow the complexities and erasures in the data to inform the approach to and meaning constructed from them (Thatcher et al. 2015). Additional critiques of big data analysis and visualization complement a chief concern over naive empiricism with what might be described as naive design and naive ethics. Crawford et al (2014: 1664) summarize these critiques: “older concerns -- technical, epistemological, and ethical -- haunt the domain of big data.” While big data visualization often is characterized as an endeavor of the emerging digital geohumanities (DeLyser and Sui 2012), the humanities too often fail to influence the design of big data visualizations. As a result, many big data visualizations are designed as templates to ingest and aggregate data streams irrespective of their contexts, minimizing the opportunity to organize meaning, divorcing the visual style from the message, and obfuscating the authors of the visualization and their design motives (Muehlenhaus 2012). Though they might also be “stunning,” “awesome,” and “fantastic,” the message communicated through big data visualization is thus often opaque (Gieseking 2013). Further, there are renewed ethical concerns with the political economy and governance of spatial big data(e.g., Crampton 2014, Kitchin 2014, Thatcher 2014, Leszczynski 2015, Wilson 2014). Given the potential risks associated with hazardous waste, it is essential to ask who gets access to, analyzes, and visualizes big data about it, and for what purposes.Several cartographers have suggested the possibility of coaxing stories from otherwise unstructured big data (e.g., Caquard 2013, Robinson 2011, Crampton et al. 2013, Muehlenhaus 2014), using narrative to make big data visualizations less opaque(Gershon and Page 2001). Just as the data cannot speak for themselves, the story cannot tell itself. In this way, a storytelling approach edifies the role of small, curated datasets in EJ research (Burns and Thatcher 2015), as an active author must leverage their situated understanding in order to cull small stories from big data. A storytelling approach also reinvests in the importance of process over product to critical visualization. The dialectic structuring and critique of unique narrative threads drawn from big data have the potential to support “undisciplined” discourse, unconstrained by pre-existing analytical frameworks or canonical conventions (Crampton and Krygier 2005). Storytelling as the visualization process also confronts the provenance of and absences in big data (Robinson and Weaver 2006), and generates new insights about the waste landscape and environmental justice not only at the end of analysis, but during it (e.g., Lepawsky 2016). A focus on process and especially storytelling enables researchers to humanize the data, bringing their own voice into the interpretation (Pearce 2008, Kelly 2015).      2.3 Visualization to Enhance Critical Geographic PedagogyThe process of visualization has potential to impact not just how we approach research and regulation of hazardous waste, but also how we discuss environmental justice in the classroom. Mapping and visualization promotes critical geographic thinking, providing concrete instructional materials to help visual learners grapple with complex geographic processes that exist on a global scale or are otherwise unseen in the local landscapes (Downs et al. 2006). However, critical geographic thinking is more than reasoning about spatial patterns in maps: it also requires careful questioning of the assumptions behind the data preparation and visualization, and equally careful consideration of the range of perspectives that others may hold on the presented visual explanation (Lund and Sinton 2007). It requires a critical deconstruction of the quantifications in the visualization, with students emerging with a layered understanding of how the visualization privileges, obscures, and silences geographic actors.Many educators approach instruction of critical thinking through Bloom et al.’s (1956) taxonomy of learning objectives, which uses a scaffolded design to advance from simple to complex learning outcomes to gain mastery. The contemporary update to Bloom’s taxonomy reimagines each objective as an action (i.e., a process) rather than an outcome (i.e., a product), and positions the process of “creating” as the highest, integrative level of learning (Anderson et al. 2001). Creativity requires “active” learning, or supervised learning-by-doing (Schyvens et al. 2008, Schultz 2012), resulting in deep learning engagements in which students conceptualize, negotiate, and execute their learning experience.The Design Challenge was intended to be a critical pedagogical experience, building on non-traditional approaches for promoting creativity from the visualization community, such as student design competitions (e.g., CaGIS student competitions, NACIS student competitions), hack-a-thons or map-a-thons (e.g., Zook 2012, Quinn and Yapa 2016), and informal mapping meetups and workshops (e.g., GISCollective, MapTime). The DC also drew from several emerging practices for promoting creativity used in our cartography curriculum [blinded]. First, the DC scenario and logistics focused on using visualization to break from “misconceptions”, or problematic knowledge that students bring to a learning context that can stifle creative and critical thinking (Fouberg, 2013). For the transnational hazardous waste trade, misconceptions may include expected spatial clusters and correlations; assumptions about the completeness accuracy and transparency of data and regulatory practice; among others. Second, experts in waste geography, EJ, and geographic visualization were available through the Design Challenge to help students achieve “threshold concepts”, or breakthroughs in theoretical, critical, or technical instruction that need to be addressed before students can build understanding and demonstrate their creativity (Perkins, 1999). Finally, the DCe focused on meta-reflection, requiring students to come together at different points throughout the day to describe their experience and learn from each other (Bozkurt et al. 2015), ultimately focusing on the learning process in combination with the design products.3. MethodsOn Saturday, February 14th, 2015, geography students, faculty, staff, and visiting scholars crowded into the [blinded] for the first annual “Design Challenge.” The DC drew 17 student participants in total: nine women and eight men, and two PhD students, four MSc students, six GIS certificate students, and five undergraduate students from the [blinded]. The participating students were supported throughout the day by two faculty, two staff, two visiting scholars, and two PhD student consultants, each of whom held relevant expertise in environmental justice, and/or visualization. As introduced above, participants were challenged with the task of visualizing meaningful and unique stories from a common dataset on the transnational hazardous waste trade in North America. The dataset was he first product of a longstanding research project seeking to determine the spatial distribution of hazardous materials, identify any local (subnational) waste havens, and start to unravel the complex drivers associated with the transnational hazardous waste trade among Canada, Mexico and the United States. The dataset contained information on transnational shipments of hazardous waste regulated by the EPA through the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and obtained through a set of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests [blinded]. The resulting dataset synthesized three main data sources: 1) import consent notice authorizations from the EPA to importers to US waste streams, 2) annual reports from companies exporting waste from the United States to Canada and/or Mexico, and 3) manifests documenting the nature, volume, and destination of each shipment of waste brought into the US. The final dataset provided to participants included 21,184 import and export shipment entries (27% of what the final dataset totals) with each import entry containing up to 41 quantitative and qualitative attributes with 3,370 unique possibilities and each export entry containing up to 29 quantitative and qualitative attributes with 3,570 unique possibilities. The dataset covered US imports and exports from 2005-2012 with notable gaps and inconsistencies. Thus, the dataset was large, disparate, heterogeneous, and uncertain -- although on the low end of what may be considered “big data” in computer science -- and overall considerably messier and more complex than what participating students had used in prior coursework.We distributed the dataset and instructions for the Design Challenge to participants one week in advance of the event. We provided limited direction to participants on how they should approach their design, both in terms of background context and design technology. The Design Challenge began at 9:00am with a 30-minute group session in which we briefly introduced the project in the context of environmental justice, outlined the format of the day, and fielded questions. Participants were allowed to work individually or in pairs and self-organized into 12 design teams, resulting in five two-person group projects and seven individual projects. Participants designed until 5:00pm, with short check-ins every two hours to garner feedback from peers. All teams presented their work during a closing ceremony lasting from 5:30-6:30pm. Participants were afforded one additional week to integrate design feedback and resubmit the final product, with 10 teams submitting final designs. We offered $900 in prizes to award excellence in storytelling and design, with all participants receiving at least $10 and three meals for participation.In order to evaluate the Design Challenge as an alternative pedagogical method, we conducted follow up interviews with the participants one year after the event. Of the 17 student participants, 14 participants were available for an interview; two participating undergraduates and one certificate student were unavailable during the interview period. We conducted nine interviews in person and five by Skype. Interviews lasted from 30 to 60 minutes and followed a semi-structured protocol loosely structured around four topics: 1) their process during the event; 2) their resulting understanding of EJ, including erasures and uncertainties in the dataset, 3) reflections on the prompt to find stories in the big dataset, and 4) reflections on the Design Challenge as a non-traditional learning experience. Nine of the 14 interview participants had graduated from [blinded] and were able to reflect on how the Design Challenge supported and informed their early-career responsibilities. We recorded interviews which were transcribed and coded according to key themes and tensions. 4. Results and DiscussionThe DC successfully generated a range of unique stories from the big dataset for us to pursue in the broader research project. In this section, we first present the products of the day’s event, highlighting the EJ narratives generated by the participants. Next, we discuss the opportunities and tensions in the process of finding stories in the dataset revealed by the follow-up interviews. Finally, we summarize opportunities and tensions in attempting the Design Challenge as “undisciplined” pedagogy, towards the goal of envisioning the Design Challenge as a pedagogical method for EJ research and education. 4.1 Design Challenge Products and New Research Questions for Environmental JusticeThe Design Challenge generated an impressive array of original and creative visual stories, despite the limited familiarity participants had with the transnational hazardous waste trade and environmental justice prior to the event. The products from the DC represented new and at times undisciplined research questions regarding environmental justice that have since influenced the project. These research questions and associated visualizations can be broadly categorized as having three, non-mutually exclusive foci (Table 1): 1) uneven spatial distributions of risk at multiple scales (n=5); 2) flows of waste between specific sites in different countries (n=6); and 3) political economic processes (n=6). [Table 1 approximately here]Uneven Spatial Distributions of Risk at Multiple ScalesFive teams visualized a waste attribute -- the amount and/or type of waste -- as unevenly distributed risk in the landscape.  Each of these teams mapped risk distributions at a different geographic scale, embodying the prompt to find unique stories, rather than assess aggregates. In some cases, teams linked the spatial distribution of waste with demographic data on race and income, but no team performed spatial statistics correlating them. Instead each team investigated specific regional and local contexts. For instance, one participant used Detroit as a test of the traditional EJ assumptions that poor and minority neighborhoods are disproportionately burdened with waste disposal and processing facilities (Figure 1). Through a visual assessment, she found that facilities tended to be located in a variety of neighborhoods (white, non-white, and mixed-race) when viewing census tracts. In contrast, a second participant examined the uneven burden of risk at the scale of zip codes in a slideshow of maps, and did find visual relationships between treatment facilities and community rates of educational attainment and unemployment, with the Detroit area standing out with the highest unemployment rate among communities with a treatment facility (Figure 2). Taken together, these visual stories suggest that the industry as it currently exists in Detroit may be driven more by unemployment than race compared to other US communities, and call into question the appropriate scale(s) of analysis. Overall, visual stories highlighting the spatial unevenness of risk raised new questions about how places vary in their experience with the trade and the reliability of the dataset. [Figure 1 approximately here][Figure 2 approximately here]Transnational FlowsHalf of the teams mapped flows of waste between specific import and export sites in different countries. Mapping flows of waste represents a different approach to understanding the unevenly distributed burdens of hazardous waste processing, as flow mapping grapples with the dynamics through which particular kinds of wastes arrive in specific communities. As with the uneven spatial distributions of risk, students mapped transnational flows at different scales and regions, again providing insight into the regional and local contexts of flows. One team examined the Great Lakes region, demonstrating how the trade in solid lead waste was concentrated around Lake Erie, with most importers located in Michigan and Ohio and exporters in Ontario (Figure 3). Seeing the isolated flows of lead made us consider the ways that physical properties of any kind of waste may shape the geography of its disposal. Another team focused specifically on borders, visualizing the communities that function as chokepoints for waste’s entry into the western US and tracking the waste from entry to deposition (Figure 4; Slides 1-9). Through their multiple maps, the team demonstrated that hazardous waste imports enter the western US through a small set of border crossings and terminate at a small subset of landfills.. The team enriched the story by drawing on context information to inform how the landfills were developed and their impacts on local communities, including how one community fought against the landfill (Figure 4; Slides 10-15). In this way, every flow route and each landfill has a unique story. Overall, these visualizations of the flows of hazardous waste raised new questions about the local and regional drivers and impacts of the transnational waste trade, directing us to pursue future work on the historic link between exporting and importing sites, border regulations, and the growth of subnational waste havens for particular hazardous materials.  [Figure 3 approximately here][Figure 4 approximately here]Political Economic ProcessesFour teams made maps that more completely described the political and economic processes underlying transnational flows of hazardous waste. Maps illustrating the corporate consolidation of the waste trade represent a response to the representational challenges posed by more sophisticated understandings of environmental justice. Two teams noted that a significant portion of the trade is handled by just a few companies. A first team found that one company, Clean Harbors, accounts for around 40% of all shipments, most of which are made between facilities it owns in the US and Canada (Figure 5). A second team was able to distill nine percent of the flows to a single shipping route of vinyl chloride between Mexico and the US, using contextual information to conclude that “Low transport costs plus NAFTA equals a booming trade in hazardous waste between Mexico and the US.” (Figure 6) Even if they make no explicit connections between consolidation and environmental justice in specific sites, these maps draw attention to the power dynamics that shape where firms locate processing facilities and the effects this has on the kinds of waste entering such communities.[Figure 5 approximately here][Figure 6 approximately here]Finally, one participant used hand-drawn cartooning to create created the beginnings of a “choose your own adventure” game, in which players adopt the perspective of a stakeholder in the hazardous waste industry, each having a different set of incentives and risk regarding their participation. Her visualizations (Figure 7) aimed to consider, “how [waste] affects the people who interact with it, how it affects the industry itself.” Highlighting the structural processes driving the industry, rather than individual sources of pollution, this participant demonstrates how much of environmental racism is the result of unintentional discrimination and differential opportunities (Pulido 2000; cf. Pulido 2015). Overall, teams that grappled with the political economic processes behind the transnational hazardous waste trade used provocative but very different design styles to engender different affective responses to their visual stories about the political economy of transnational hazardous waste.[Figure 7 approximately here]4.2 Reflections on Finding Stories in Big DataParticipant reflections one year after the Design Challenge revealed common themes in the design of big data visualizations, as well as several tensions in the process of finding stories in big data. Across participants, storytelling was viewed as a useful, non-traditional construct for making sense of big datasets in three main ways. First, nine participants indicated that the process of restructuring analyses of big data as unique stories added clarity and promoted a linear narrative in their presentation (e.g., the slideshows in Figures 2, 3, and 7, the numbering in Figures 1 and 6).  As one participant stated, the use of a linear narrative with a concrete beginning, middle, and ending enabled the team to “really develop a better visual flow, tell a better story.” The prompt to find stories in the dataset led all ten teams to present their findings at the end of the DC, not as singular map products, but as a not always linear sequence of visuals and text describing their critical thinking process about the transnational hazardous waste trade and environmental justice.Second, six participants discussed storytelling as more than just making sense of data: at its core, it implies “engaging” an audience or “captivating” a reader. Storytelling makes otherwise complicated geographic processes “understandable”, “relatable”, and “memorable” in a way that data alone do not, as participants affirmed. Packaging data into stories also lets the reader bring their situated experiences and perspectives to the story. As one participant observed: “storytelling is [about] trying to spark other people, other people's minds, to look at it, and then they themselves will tell a story...bringing in all of their background knowledge and experience to understand the information with which they're being presented.” In this way, stories do not tell themselves: the tellers and readers negotiate the story through the visualization. Thus, visual storytelling is a process at work, and “just really helps people be more invested in it and really helps it stick, [the story] sticks with you.” A final theme consistent across the majority of participants was the importance of finding meaningful “threads” in the dataset and the associated process of “weaving” these threads together into a coherent story. As one participant suggested, visual stories are purposefully partial, drawing a relevant or interesting subset from the dataset and “run[ning] with it and tell a story.” Following a storytelling metaphor, participants discussed these partial threads less like different narrative plots and more like unique characters. Five participants established places or regions as characters or threads (e.g., Detroit as a key place, Ohio as a key region, borders as an organizing geographic concept), four participants approached individual companies (e.g., Clean Harbors, Dynecol, Inc., Waste Management, Inc.), and three participants considered specific types of waste (e.g., lead, vinyl chloride). Four participants imagined actual people managing and living with waste as the central organization of their visual story. Despite the generally positive reaction to our prompt to coax stories from the large and complex dataset, several notable tensions were evident in participant reflections indicating differences in storytelling strategies.These are discussed below as tensions around naive empiricism, naive ethics, and naive design.      Naive Empiricism? Directed Storytelling vs. Undirected StoryseekingPerhaps the most significant tension related to the process for identifying stories in the dataset. Participants fell into one of two camps. Five participants performed what we describe as directed storytelling, in which they came to the Design Challenge with a clear topic in mind and sought evidence from the dataset to support their narrative arc. These directed storytellers conducted background research on hazardous waste and environmental justice before diving into the dataset. Directed storytellers relied less exclusively on the dataset we provided and more on other context information, drawing from sources such as the US Census’ American Community Survey, the National Salary Trend Tool, and materials safety violations from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. As one directed storyteller stated “most of the information I presented was not part of the dataset that was provided to me”, while a second explained “I would take what I could from the dataset and then, if I couldn’t find the answer from the dataset, which sometimes happened, I looked for other data.”In contrast, nine of the interview participants performed the process of undirected storyseeking in which they mined the dataset for relevant threads and drew on limited outside context. As one undirected storyseeker exclaimed, “You give me a spreadsheet, I’ll find the story,” while a second said he used the morning of the Design Challenge to “let [his] creative juices flow.” To identify threads in the dataset, seven undirected storyseekers searched for regional clusters in the import and processing of waste, three searched for unique outliers in imports or exports, and three searched for visual correlations between trade volume and proxies of marginalization used in environmental justice. Notably, three of the directed storytellers switched to the process of undirected storyseeking because they could not find evidence in the dataset that supported their original idea within the Design Challenge timeframe. As one of these participants explained, “there’s no story if there’s no data”.Despite this split amongst participants, they saw advantages and limitations with both approaches for finding stories. Several participants shared concerns over their undirected storyseeking, echoing the “naive empiricism” critique of the idea that data can “speak for themselves.” They were concerned about finding relationships or stories that were not real. One participant reflected that, “I saw people messing around with data and trying to create stories out of it. Whether those stories were appropriate to the data or to the task at hand was rather up in the air,” while a second concerned participant stated that, “I think having a big dataset was just inducement to dig out its spurious correlations.” However, the directed storytelling approach also drew criticism, as preconceptions and bias can lead to a story that “is in fact being spun.” Critics noted how easy it was to find what they wanted to find in the dataset. As one participant claimed about directed storytelling, “You could go dig around for the numbers that support what you think you're gonna find and you'll probably find them because it's hard to sort out.” Participants did offer positive sentiment that undirected exploration of big datasets is important and useful, with one stating that, “There is this large amount of data and you can't just ignore it. As a designer you have to be able to adapt to it and be able to understand what's in the data.” Participants further reflected on potential solutions to the limits of both undirected and directed storytelling. One participant stated that it may be more useful in undirected storyseeking “to think in terms of cases rather than exploration,” with the goal of presenting unique case sites, rather than generating new insights about broad patterns. Regarding directed storytelling, several participants noted the value of cultivating multiple perspectives, with one participant stating that “it is okay to be subjective and creative...I don't think that subjectivity is always bad” and a second adding, “I think the value of the Design Challenge was to show that you can address a dataset -- a ridiculous dataset, a ridiculous problem -- with lots of different maps coming at it from lots of different angles.” A final solution identified by multiple participants was collaboration. As one participant stated, working with a partner and presenting findings to the group helped them to avoid “telling a lie” by only using data that supported their claims, while a second reflected on prior professional experience, stating that “I’ve done this kind of thing before...we're handed a big ugly spreadsheet and told,‘pan for gold’, and so it was just all pretty familiar. I guess what I learned is peer advice helps because I'm always looking at the big spreadsheets alone.” Thus, the collaborative component of the Design Challenge encouraged participants to grapple with the ethical dimensions of coaxing stories from a complex dataset, a lesson that stuck with many participants one year after the event.Naive Ethics? Trust and Big Data VisualizationA second, related tension that divided participants was their level of trust in the dataset and the visualizations they created during the DC. Trust is particularly important in an environmental justice and waste regulation context, where visualization is used both to edify and undermine the status quo. The big data context further complicated the perceived trust in the visual stories; as one participant remembered, “one thing I learned from the other folks is just because there are a lot of entries, it does not mean [the data are] more accurate." As a result, interview participants were split seven-to-seven when asked if they trusted the dataset and visualizations. Participants recalled a range of uncertainties that negatively impacted their design process and trust in the data (Table 2), an issue list that has proved extremely valuable to our subsequent analyses of transnational flows of hazardous waste. Discussion of trust also pointed to the deeper drivers behind the erasures and silences in the dataset. Regardless of whether they ultimately trusted the dataset, it was clear that the Design Challenge helped participants move past a naive notion of environmental justice and big data. One participant noted, “I guess what struck to me was the huge element of human error in the collection of these numbers,” with a second suggesting that the dataset, “ignores one whole big aspect of environmental justice, which is procedural and about access to power and decision-making structures.” The workshop format of the DC also promoted critical quantification as a processual skill applicable to other big data visualization contexts. As one participant summarized, “You're seldom going to hear about those flaws unless you engage in a workshop like we did where I could hear my peers say that there were a lot of holes there or those stuff that just didn't make sense.”[Table 2 approximately here]Naive Design? Visual Style and Humanizing DataA final noteworthy tension in participant reflections was related to the importance of visual style to the story, and the associated affective response of the intended audience to the visualization. The majority of participants--particularly those following undirected storyseeking--did not consider how the visual style could reinforce their narrative and perspective until late in the Design Challenge. One participant stated that most of the design “happened in the last 30 minutes” while a second remembered spending “the minimum amount of time on cartography” explaining that he mostly  “was tweaking what will show up on a projector and what won't get [him] yelled at by the other cartographers“.However, four of the interview participants decided on their visual style at the beginning of the DC. Here, visual style was more than moving beyond the naive design common in big data visualization: it was an opportunity to give voice to the people and places impacted by the transnational waste trade. One participant focusing on visual style stated that she “ found meaning by thinking about individuals, by thinking about the people who are actually sorting the recycling” while a second stated that the “reason that [she] went [the comics] route is that [she] was trying to include as many different people who were interacting directly with the waste as possible” (see Figure 7). In this way, developing a visual style was described as method to “humanize” the dataset. One participant emphasized that “stories for [him] had to have humans” while a second stated that his “main concern was how [to] humanize this dataset because ... [he] saw a lot of numbers, but [he] couldn’t see the people.“ The tension around visual style points to the opportunity to further integrate concepts from the digital humanities in non-traditional, undisciplined understanding of big data visualization and visual storytelling as they apply to hazards regulation and environmental justice.4.3 Reflections on Undisciplined Pedagogy The Design Challenge provided the research team with avenues for further exploration, but it also facilitated learning about environmental justice and big data visualization on the part of the student participants, as evidenced in follow up interviews. Substantively, participants noted overcoming common misconceptions about the hazardous waste trade and heightened awareness of EJ concerns. Six participants noted an increased awareness of issues of race and class inequality with regards to communities where waste is concentrated: the fundamental threshold concept for grasping the idea of environmental justice. Participants also noted discovering the “very scary” scope of the hazardous waste trade, as well as the predominance of only a handful of companies in it. As one participant stated, “I was really surprised how much how big [the transnational hazardous waste trade] is and that [companies] are really making money off of this.” Two further participants explicitly stated that this “surprised” them, while another recalled the process of discovery through which she learned about corporate consolidation in the waste trade: “going through the data and seeing these flows and just how much money is in some things like this dirty waste. In our case we looked at lead and it's something ... that's really hurting people.” Such comments, in addition to the final products on political economy, demonstrated increased understanding of the political economic mechanisms and patterns behind current waste flows. Relatedly[4][5][6], participants learned a number of threshold concepts related to big data and the difficulty of working with real world datasets. They reported grasping for the first time the inadequacies of certain software programs (e.g., Excel and GIS packages) when confronted with big data; the need to expand their willingness to use other tools; their surprise at the messiness of real world data; the importance of filtering and visualizing subsets of the dataset to get a sense of its contents; and their difficulty in finding meaning in the dataset as a whole.The level of uncertainty in the data -- and its connection to environmental governance -- was one of the major convergence points that helped all students, regardless of their educational background, to appreciate more advanced EJ concepts. Many participants, for example, reported shock at the lack of knowledge about and oversight of the transnational hazardous waste trade, whether they felt that this was accidental or part of a more intentional effort on the part of the government or corporations. For example, one participant stated “it was surprising to see the government doesn't know where all the stuff is going,” while a second commented on the human error involved in data collection: “I thought the EPA or whoever was collecting this...would have been much more, I guess, comprehensive than it turns out that they are.” For a third participant, problems with the data reflected a lack of will, but not malice (cf. Pulido 2000; Pulido 2015). He believed, “nobody cared enough about transnational waste to make and actually build the database about it .... It was... clothed not in secrecy but just obscurity.” Others, though, thought the secrecy willful, saying, “[the companies] didn’t want the general public knowing about, probably, the hazardous waste moving around. These companies don’t want people knowing what they are doing that much...” Another participant put the blame, not on companies, but on the collecting agency: “... if it's from a government or something like that, it could be difficult because usually governments don't want you to know things, you know.” Despite the successful attainment of several threshold concepts in EJ and in using big data for storytelling and visualization, the Design Challenge also reflected tensions inherent in collaborative research and learning across (sub) disciplinary divides. The main tensions centered on the issues of: 1) EJ vs. design learning; 2) Product vs. process orientation; 3) Competition vs. collaboration. EJ vs Design LearningThe DC was intended to produce transdisciplinary engagement around one research topic and enable all participants to learn about environmental justice issues from the perspective of human geography as well as visualization and design in cartography. While some participants worked with a person in another sub-discipline of Geography, however, most worked with students in their own primary interest area.Moreover, the takeaways that students reported centered on their goals for the day and the perspective with which they entered the day, with design-related learning dominating participants’ reported outcomes. As might be expected, students with prior experience in human geography reported fewer threshold insights into EJ issues in general terms. As one student put it, “the DC just really reinforced to me that there are so many -- all these issues are social justice issues and that it is really uneven who's affected by these things.” Even if participants were generally aware of EJ issues, though, having real life data in front of them concretized EJ concerns in an emotional way. One remarked on the scope of the trade: “Seeing big numbers and then being like, how much? Is that in pounds? Oh my god.” Another participant was indignant: “[companies] still feel that they can just like push[waste] out of one place and just dump it somewhere else ... and...there are the people living there and people being affected by that.” Students with more experience in design often admitted never having considered EJ issues in the past. For at least two of participants, the DC represented their first exposure to EJ: “I hadn’t like really known about transfer of waste before, so it definitely made me realize the inequalities. Where the waste was going and who it was affecting and the social injustice of that.” Another made learning about EJ her explicit goal: “going into this, I didn't really know too much about what environmental justice was. And so I did a little bit of research of that during the day and then even before the day started. Just to get kind of a feel for what it meant, or what it could mean... So that's why I wanted to go down this route, looking at race in relation to the locations of the hazardous waste sites.” While some students, especially those with design backgrounds and who approached the DC intending to learn a specific software tool, gained more in terms of design, nearly all participants came away with new understandings or attitudes (“shock”, “surprise”, etc.) towards EJ issues, at least pertaining to the transnational hazardous waste trade.Product Orientation vs Process[7][8] Orientation [9]In part, some of the unevenness in the above learning outcomes relates to a division in student motivation for participating in the DC. Eight of the interview participants  were more concerned with the product that they would share at the end of the day, while six focused more on the process of learning new design skills. Participants with a product orientation focused their attention on meeting the opening prompt to compellingly visualize a particular story related to environmental justice using the dataset. As a result, product oriented participants tended to learn and remember the most about environmental justice and waste regulation. However, those with a product orientation were often more focused on the competitive aspect of the DC and on making a good impression on their peers. As one participant noted, “participants don't want to lose face in front of their peers...they will work quite hard to maintain or augment their professional reputation.” In contrast, participants with a process orientation wanted to use the lock-in format of the DC to learn a new tool or technique. For one such student, “it wasn’t about finishing a map” while another felt that, “if I want [the DC] to be useful, I’m going to use it explore a new software tool.” Most process oriented participants did not attempt to develop a unique visual style and were content with sharing screenshots of their work at the closing presentation rather than final designs. Relatedly, those students who were less concerned with producing a polished visualization by the end of the day were more likely to report learning to work or enjoying working creatively, including learning new skills or trying different visual stories. One participant explained, “we didn’t get what we want[ed], but in the end I did learn a lot about QGIS, and today it’s my main GIS software that I use everyday.” Competition vs CollaborationThe DC was conceived as a one-day competition that would allow participants to practice and hone their skills, as well as learn new information and skills in the context of friendly competition. While organizers imagined this to be a motivating factor given the prize money, participants’ feelings about the competition format varied widely. Some found competition helped them to focus their efforts, while others were intimidated by competing against peers in front of faculty and staff. In fact, one observer of the day’s activities explained that, for her, the competition format prevented her from participating in the Challenge. There is no way of knowing how widespread such feelings might have been, but it is possible that other students chose not to participate for similar reasons. However, many participants reported that their feelings about the DC shifted positively throughout the day. Many remembered nervousness and anxiety at the beginning of the day that had dissipated by the end. As one participant stated, “I was pretty nervous and a little intimidated with the data going in, and at the end of the day, it was you know, I'd say it was a pretty successful day." Further, the competition format did not impede collaborative learning, as many respondents reported helping and receiving help from other individuals or groups throughout the day:I know a few times people were just trying to remember, 'Okay, we definitely learned how to clean X-Y tables, but I don't remember how we did that. Does anyone have that original thing?;” and went on to state that “ there was a lot of -- a strong cross current of information exchange, knowledge exchanged and there was -- it was a team effort at some point, just trying to get through the morning. Teammates also learned how to collaborate with each other. As one process-oriented participant stated “I did what we did with using a Github repository [a software collaboration tool] to organize and split up the tasks because it felt like we had a huge amount of stuff to do and not very much time and even just with a pair of people.” Many participants also reported learning more from their peers’ work as it was presented at the end of the day than their own visualization. As one participant noted, "seeing other people's presentation[s] I definitely learn[ed] a lot more about what, what's going on.”5. ConclusionThe DC as a process and event was successful in helping the project to creatively visualize slices of the big dataset and identify compelling stories that might provide new roads for an ongoing critical EJ research project related to the transnational hazardous waste trade in North America. Critical environmental justice scholarship seeks to explain why and how minorities are differentially exposed to hazards (Pulido 1996; Maantay 2002; Mohai and Saha 2007), and expands the environmental justice framework beyond the US (e.g., Carruthers 2008). While these are welcome advancements, such historical and contextual approaches pose challenges to visual representation, which must extend beyond maps demonstrating spatial correlations. Many participants in the DC, without prompting, encountered these challenges and overcame them in creative ways by highlighting uneven distributions of imported waste across scales, mapping transnational flows of hazardous materials, and exploring political economic processes like corporate consolidation and structural environmental racism, giving the research team new avenues for exploration of a big data set. These results supported our focus on visualization as a process for raising undisciplined lines of inquiry that are always at work, helping to forge research agendas with the potential to illuminate the complexity of local and global drivers of uneven exposure to risk in ways including, but also moving beyond, traditional products.As an experiment in undisciplining EJ and visualization pedagogy, our case study revealed that participant experience reflected some of the tensions inherent in transdisciplinary research and education, as well as some fundamental tensions in alternative pedagogic methods. Notably, while students came into the DC focused, not on increasing their understanding of or ability to work in another area of geography, but on strengthening skills and knowledge in their specialty area, our follow up interviews revealed the overcoming of several misconceptions and attainment of many threshold concepts in big data visualization and EJ across the group. This was especially evident in the common “surprise” expressed by participants at both the immensity of the hazardous waste trade in North America and the difficulties in accurately tracking it. The “undisciplining” of the EJ project, therefore, was achieved, not by cross-disciplinary training per se (as in each student on his or her own is now able to operate across subfields), but in the collective and collaborative effort of applying diverse epistemological approaches and skill sets to one common problem. Even participants who were so focused on the process of learning that they remembered little of their own product, remembered other stories from the day more than one year out. Many of the strong and weak points of the DC as a method for advancing an “undisciplined” approach to complex EJ issues are arguably inherent to both transdisciplinary work and novel forms of pedagogy. Given the detailed assessments of the program garnered in the follow up interviews, however, a few changes could be made to augment the already overall positive outcomes. First, while undirected storytelling remains a valuable tool for approaching such a data-set, the research team could have provided more, very basic, context in terms of EJ work to all of the participants. For example, while we were careful not to provide a firm definition of environmental justice work, we were surprised at the common refrain that what students were finding was not environmental justice, but environmental injustice. Introductory remarks that better laid out the terrain of EJ as studying precisely that - environmental injustice - would have been useful in this cross-disciplinary context, but were assumed unnecessary by those most familiar with the topic. Second, the research team, comprising mostly faculty members in this case, could have done more to assuage early anxiety related to the idea and practice of competition. In large part, this was the result of a failure to communicate the degree to which we viewed this as both a professionalization experience and a collaborative learning and community building exercise. It was also likely an effect of the event structure, which rewarded the best final maps (with prize money), thus favoring a product orientation. Given the divide between product- and process-based approaches, rewarding both of these might have mitigated anxieties about producing a product. Follow up interviews conducted a year after the event provide an unusual opportunity to assess the lasting outcomes of the DC as “undisciplined” pedagogy for an “undisciplined” problem. While a fuller detailing of lasting outcomes is beyond the scope of this paper, the DC did prove to achieve many of its goals in the months after the challenge.These positive outcomes are closely linked to approaching visualization as a process for critical pedagogy that allows students to creatively engage in a common problem across epistemological divides. For participants, increased confidence when addressing new problems and real world datasets, as well as the ability to work under time pressure and with a variety of software proved to be essential training for professional careers. Additionally, several of the participants pursued or are pursuing related EJ topics in classes, theses, and other projects. For the department that houses the research project, this expanded interest in EJ among students as well as the success of the DC has contributed to increased interest in collaborative and interdisciplinary work. 1 Also referred to in this paper as “waste”This is where I moved the part from above.[SM2R1][SM3R1]Not to expand this section greatly, but a quote on this threshold concept would be helpful to conclude the paragraphy, I think. If I have time, I will circle back to my coding to see if there is a quote that demonstrates this point (I seem to remember this being a common theme).It might, but I think that this is covered a bit below in product v skills so I'm not sure we want to expand hereYeah skipCalling this "process" makes it relate better to the arc of the paper, albeit at the expense of being a bit less clear. My vote is to go with process, but I see it both ways.Sarah: I inverted the order of ideas here, since I think we were hoping for product orientation at first, but in the end process/skills was just as good for the students.Sarah: I inverted the order of ideas here, since I think we were hoping for product orientation at first, but in the end process/skills was just as good for the students.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------34